THE

GREEK MYTHS

THE GREEK MYTHS
STORIES OF THE GREEK GODS AND HEROES VIVIDLY
RETOLD
ROBIN WATERFIELD AND KATHRYN WATERFIELD

New York • London
© 2012 by Robin Waterfield
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by
any electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval
systems, without permission in writing from the publisher, except by reviewers,
who may quote brief passages in a review. Scanning, uploading, and electronic
distribution of this book or the facilitation of the same without the permission of
the publisher is prohibited.
Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or
encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the
author’s rights is appreciated.
Any member of educational institutions wishing to photocopy part or all of the
work for classroom use or anthology should send inquiries to Permissions c/o
Quercus Publishing Inc., 31 West 57th Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10019,
or to permissions@quercus.com.
ISBN 978-1-62365214-2
Distributed in the United States and Canada by Random House Publisher
Services
c/o Random House, 1745 Broadway
New York, NY 10019
www.quercus.com

For Julian, Kathy, James, and Alexis

CONTENTS
Introduction
The Ancient Greek Landscape
1 HOPE FOR HUMANKIND
The Population of the Earth
2 THE ASCENT OF THE OLYMPIAN GODS
In the Beginning
War against the Titans
War against the Giants
Zeus and His Brothers
3 THE GODS OF OLYMPUS
Zeus the King
Hera
Hestia
Demeter
Aphrodite
Ares
Hephaestus
Athena
Apollo
Artemis
Hermes
Dionysus
4 THE AGE OF HEROES
The Flood
The Line of Deucalion
The Argonauts and the Golden Fleece

The Calydonian Boar Hunt
Io and the Danaids
Perseus and the Gorgon
Bellerophon
5 THEBES IN THE AGE OF HEROES
Cadmus, Europa, and the Foundation of Thebes
Oedipus
The Seven against Thebes
6 MYCENAE IN THE AGE OF HEROES
The Curse of the House of Atreus
Atreus and Thyestes
The End of the Atreid Curse
7 ATHENS IN THE AGE OF HEROES
The First Athenian Kings
The Labors of Theseus
Theseus and the Minotaur
King Theseus
8 HERACLES
The Birth of Heracles
The Twelve Labors of Heracles
Heracles the King-Maker
Heracles Becomes a God
9 THE TROJAN WAR
The Marriage of Peleus and Thetis
The Judgment of Paris
The Abduction of Helen
The Greeks Prepare for War
The Greek Landing
Achilles Withdraws
Agamemnon’s Dream
Menelaus and Paris
Diomedes’ Day of Glory
Hector Triumphant
Envoys and Spies

The Assault on the Ships
The Deception of Zeus
The Death of Patroclus
The Return of Achilles
The Death of Hector
Two Funerals
The Death of Achilles
The Wooden Horse
The Fall of Troy
10 ODYSSEUS’ RETURN
Trouble on Ithaca
Telemachus’ Journey
Odysseus on Scheria
The Cyclops Polyphemus
Aeolus, the Laestrygonians, and Circe
The Underworld
Dangers at Sea
The Cattle of the Sun
Odysseus Reaches Ithaca
At the Swineherd’s Hut
In the Palace
Penelope Meets the Beggar
Vengeance
Reunion
11 THE END OF HOPE
Pandora
Select Bibliography
Picture References

INTRODUCTION
The book you hold in your hands contains a retelling of the traditional Greek
myths and legends. You will meet all the famous and familiar stories (and
hopefully some new ones), but you may also find some unfamiliar details.
Retelling the Greek myths is not a simple matter, above all because very few, if
any, of the myths exist in a single version. Often, in fact, there are downright
contradictions between extant versions of a tale. There is no such thing, then, as
the definitive version of any myth; in fact, the more famous a story became, the
more versions there were of it.
This variability is essential to the Greek myths. They did not exist in single,
monolithic, or “authentic” versions. Consider the work of the great tragedians of
Athens in the fifth century BCE—Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. They
took the traditional tales and tweaked them for their own reasons—often to make
a political or ethical point relevant to their immediate audience. As long as the
heart of the story remained unchanged, or was intact in the background, writers
were free to add and subtract as they chose.
This is how the stories retain their vitality. By the same token, Ovid’s often
fanciful retellings in the early years of the first century CE; or Ariosto’s
adaptation of the Perseus myth in Orlando furioso (early sixteenth century); or
the 1967 Star Trek episode “Who Mourns for Adonis”; or Wolfgang Petersen’s
2004 movie Troy; or Rick Riordan’s series of Percy Jackson books for children;
or the thousands of other examples that could be given—all serve to perpetuate
in their own ways and for their own purposes the vitality of the ancient Greek
tales of war and adventure, magic and miracles, love, jealousy, murder, rape, and
revenge.
The ancient Greeks loved stories—so much that they illustrated their walls,
temples, high-end tableware, ceremonial armor, and even their furniture with
artwork that was intended to tell tales. But for them the stories served additional
purposes, over and above entertainment. When they told the myths to their
children, they expected them to be educational as well as exciting: to teach about

children, they expected them to be educational as well as exciting: to teach about
the nature of the gods and goddesses, and about their awesome powers; to
illustrate right behavior for mortal men; to see that, though the gods are
relatively omnipotent, and Fate is unavoidable, it is still a mortal’s willful
activity that brings disaster down on his or her head. Other myths served more
straightforwardly to give emotional power to the foundation of a community, to
make a religious ritual more meaningful, or to speculate about the origin of the
universe.
No myths endure unless they give a community an underlying layer of
meaningfulness. Nevertheless, the ancient Greek myths and legends have proved
to have the astonishing ability to transcend their origins, the particular cultural
contexts in which they arose, and be relevant within our societies today, as if
they tapped into some deep layer of the human mind. For us, it has been a
pleasure and a privilege to enter the stream of classical myth, to allow it to flow
through us and, we hope, to excite and engage further generations of readers.
ROBIN AND KATHRYN WATERFIELD

THE ANCIENT GREEK LANDSCAPE

MAP A: The World of Bronze Age Greece

MAP B: The Mediterranean Basin

MAP C: Ancient Greece
At the time when the Greek myths were being formulated, the world, as
conceived by the Greeks, was very different from ours. It looked like Map A, not
the modern projections of B or C. The main land masses had been identified
(apart from the Americas, of course), but were of indeterminate extent, ending in
mythical regions and ultimately surrounded by the river Ocean. The Greeks
themselves had colonized the coastlines of the known world, like frogs around a
pond, as Plato put it. They didn’t occupy countries—there was no nation state
called “Greece” until the nineteenth century CE—but more or less independent
cities. Most city-states were founded on the coastline for trade and travel, and
controlled a certain amount of the interior farmland, often in rivalry with native
tribes or neighboring Greeks.

Chapter One
HOPE FOR HUMANKIND
The Population of the Earth
The gods were bored, becalmed in the ocean of time. It’s all very well being
immortal, but time does start to weigh heavily after a few dozen millennia. Each
of them had his or her own provinces and powers, as Aphrodite was the
embodiment of sexual attraction, but long since she had exhausted all the
possibilities of fun among her fellow deities.
Boredom isn’t stillness; boredom is sameness. The gods’ lives flowed on with
endless monotony; no century was really any different from any other century,
and there was no prospect that the next century would be any different from the
last. They needed amusement and entertainment, but it wasn’t just that: they
found themselves longing even for opposition. Opposition would spark interest,
create twists and knots in the smooth unwinding yarn of the years.
They decided to populate the earth. It would be the great experiment. Perhaps
this would give their lives meaning; if not, they could always scrap that attempt
and start again. Zeus, king of the gods, enjoined his extended family to get busy,
and they fell to their task with relish. Before long, they had molded all the
creatures of the earth out of clay. Once all had their shapes, the gods gave
Prometheus the job of equipping each species with its powers.
Now, Prometheus was a Titan, one of the elder gods who had been overthrown
by Zeus and his fellow Olympians. The Titans, led by Zeus’ father Cronus, had
not given up without a struggle, but they had lost the war. Prometheus’ brothers,
Menoetius and Atlas, had been severely punished—Menoetius cast down into
the dungeons of Tartarus, and Atlas, the largest of the Titans, forced to carry on
his shoulders the burden of the heavens for all eternity.

The Titans Atlas and Prometheus; each paid a heavy price for challenging Zeus’
authority.[1]
But Prometheus had persuaded his mother Themis, the goddess of right and
order, to side with Zeus during the war, and so he and his twin brother had
escaped punishment and were living in the palaces and high halls of Olympus,
along with the other immortals. Prometheus was smart, his mind endlessly
shimmering with ideas and schemes. His brother was quite the opposite. In fact,
Epimetheus was … average. He could carry out assigned tasks well enough, but
lacked creativity and moved dully. He was inclined to make mistakes if left to
his own devices.
So Zeus gave the job of equipping the animal species to Prometheus. But
Epimetheus was jealous: “You get all the fun jobs,” he complained. “Let me
have this one.” When Prometheus hesitated, Epimetheus said: “When I’ve
finished, you can inspect my work. You’ll have the last say.”
Prometheus agreed on these terms, and Epimetheus set to work. To some

Prometheus agreed on these terms, and Epimetheus set to work. To some
creatures he gave strength, but not speed; others, those he left weaker, he made
fleet of foot. Small ones were protected by their ability to take off into the air, or
burrow inside the earth; large ones were protected by their sheer size. Some had
tusks or claws, while others had thick hides to save them from tusks and claws.
Their outsides were designed in various ways to shield them from the extremes
of heat and cold to which they would be exposed. Their insides were designed to
cope with all the various foodstuffs of the earth, with no species in danger of
exhausting its supply: some preferred roots, others leaves or grass, and yet others
the blood and flesh of weaker creatures. But then the weaker creatures gained the
boon of deep hiding places and many offspring, while the stronger ones
produced fewer.
Epimetheus was pleased with his work. He had ensured the perpetuation of all
species. His masters would be delighted. But first he had to satisfy his brother.
And Prometheus was pleasantly surprised. His brother had indeed done a good
job. He inspected all the animal prototypes, hearing Epimetheus’ explanations
and nodding in agreement. But there, right at the end: there was the problem.
Lost in the shadows and dust of Epimetheus’ workshop, Prometheus found a
neglected clay form. Naked, with no hoofs or claws, no speed or strength, no
natural home for refuge, no ability to live well on raw food, no impenetrable
hide—nothing. This lump of clay had nothing. But it was time. The day
appointed by Zeus for the population of the earth was at hand.
“What about this one? What are your plans for it? Anyway, what is it?”
“It’s a human being,” replied Epimetheus, close to tears as he realized his foolish
mistake. “And I have no plans for it. I just forgot it, and now I’ve used up all the
powers we were given. There’s nothing left for it.” Prometheus thought for a
little while. “All right. There’s nothing to be done now. Zeus wants the earth
populated right away, with all the species, and we’ll just have to let this …
human … fend for itself for a while. Meanwhile, I’ll try to think of something.”
And so, out of the gods’ boredom, the earth was populated with all the animal
species.
*
The gods were truly delighted with their new toys. Every aspect of life on the
earth came into existence on that day. Goodness was henceforth defined as
whether the brief part danced by a creature on the earth’s stage was pleasing in

whether the brief part danced by a creature on the earth’s stage was pleasing in
the gods’ eyes. It amused the gods to remind their creatures, in various ways,
who their masters were, and to test their goodness. Just when everything was
going well, they would cause a flood, or earthquake, or famine, or personal
disaster. And they devised more and more complex dances for their toys.
Prometheus pondered ceaselessly the problem of what to do to ensure the
survival of human beings. He felt a strange kinship with these creatures, as
though he had made them himself. He felt that they had the potential to resemble
himself and his brother—to reach the same heights of brilliance and depths of
criminal negligence. But, as things were, their lives were little better than those
of the dumb beasts around them. They soon learned to huddle together in caves,
to afford themselves some kind of protection rather than going out in search of
food one by one, but still it wouldn’t take long for the other creatures of the earth
to eliminate these defenseless men. As a first measure, then, Prometheus simply
invested them with his own essence.
It came like a bolt of lightning, illuminating the dark places. It came like the
most beautiful dawn, rising up out of the sea. It came like a two-edged sword,
dividing and yet forging the possibility of a higher union. It was called
intelligence, and with intelligence came speech. At first, the sounds they made
were meaningless and confused, but they slowly developed articulate words. By
agreeing among themselves which sounds stood for which objects, they
established means by which they could communicate and pass on knowledge
about the world, starting with their own safety. They began to develop rules to
govern their behavior, so that they could live together peaceably, without
preying on one another.
But with Promethean intelligence, these first men (for there were as yet no
women) also gained the ability to fear the future and felt the need to protect
themselves against mere possibilities. Now, the gods were not aware that the
intelligence of these human creatures had been the gift of Prometheus; they
assumed that this was their special ability, just as other creatures were strong or
swift or otherwise formidable. But they were quick to see its potential. Men now
feared the future, and the gods had the power to make the future better or worse.
So, they said, let’s make it so that men have to ask us, to beg us, to plead with
us, for the better instead of the worse. And let’s make it so that they have to ask
us in the right way, otherwise we shall just ignore their requests. This idea
pleased all the gods. It would afford them endless amusement.
So the gods invented sacrifice. Men were to pray to them for what they felt they

So the gods invented sacrifice. Men were to pray to them for what they felt they
needed, and their prayers were to be wafted up to the heavens by the smoke of
sacrifice. The sacrificial victim should be something valuable, a gift freely given
to the gods. The richer the sacrifice, the thicker the smoke, and the better the
chances that the gods on Olympus would smell the prayer. But none of this was
going to happen unless men had fire.
Prometheus was not slow to understand the importance of fire to his wards. Fire
could make up for his brother’s carelessness by giving humans the essential tool
for their survival and development. They could cook their food to make it
digestible; heat kilns to make pottery; keep warm in winter; forge metals. Fire is
the key that opens all these doors and lays the foundation of human life. Without
it, there is no possibility of advancement or civilization. With it, and with
Promethean intelligence, who knew whether men might not become as gods
themselves? At any rate, fire would be the foundation of a civilized and
communal life, which would protect them from other creatures.
So the gods came down from the palaces and high halls of Olympus to earth, to
see that this idea of theirs was carried out in the right way. With Prometheus
himself acting as the champion of his people, the negotiations were soon over.
Zeus would give men fire, and in return men were to sacrifice to the gods, giving
the gods the best bits of the sacrificial victim. “And let what is done here today
be final,” Zeus proclaimed, his voice like thunder, echoing from the surrounding
hills. “This is the Day of Fire!”
An unblemished cow was found for the first sacrifice. Zeus left it to Prometheus
to divide the beast into two halves, a portion for the gods and a lesser portion for
men. Ever anxious to look after the interests of men, whom he loved,
Prometheus the prankster played a trick on Zeus. He wrapped all the fine bits of
meat in the cow’s stomach, so that it resembled a gigantic haggis, which should
contain only offal; and he covered the cow’s skeleton with a layer of gleaming
fat, and stuck the hide back on, to make it look an attractive whole. And Zeus
chose the fair-seeming, but less nutritious portion. Not that he or the gods
needed meat; they wanted only the smoke of a sweeter sacrifice.
What was done there that day was final, as decreed irrevocably by Zeus. Forever
afterward, the gods had to be satisfied with receiving the lesser portion of every
blood sacrifice, with the smoke bearing it up to the palaces and high halls of
Olympus, along with the prayers and petitions of mortal men. For so it was done
on the Day of Fire.

on the Day of Fire.
But Zeus was furious when he discovered the trick, and decided to wipe
humankind off the face of the earth. He would not do this by flood or famine or
overwhelming disaster. He wanted them to suffer, and he wanted Prometheus to
see them suffer. He simply withdrew his offer of fire. Without fire, and without
the arts and crafts that fire could supply, humankind would die out. It would take
time, as the other creatures preyed on them, but that would only make it more
interesting, and a more fitting punishment.
Prometheus chose a desperate expedient. He knew the consequences, knew that
he was destined to be the wounded healer. He accompanied the rest of the gods
back to Olympus, and immediately stole into the workshop of Hephaestus, the
blacksmith god. There was always fire to be found there. Concealing and
preserving the precious flower of fire in the stalk of a giant fennel plant, he
brought it down from heaven to earth. It was still the Day of Fire: what was done
that day was final. Prometheus gave fire, life, and civilization to mankind, and it
could not be taken back. Men raised high the burning brands and danced all
night in celebration. They were safe now; they would survive, and even, in ages
to come, make themselves the dominant species on the broad face of the earth.
But the wrath of Zeus fell fiercely on Prometheus. Hephaestus forged
adamantine chains and Prometheus, bound, was dragged from Olympus down to
earth, to the Caucasian mountains. There he was splayed out naked, and pinned
to the rock by his wrists and ankles with the adamantine chains, which for
security were driven lengthwise through the center of a mighty pillar and deep
into the bedrock of the mountain. He had no chance of escape, but that was not
the worst of it. Every day a gigantic eagle came and tore open his stomach and
gorged on his liver; every night the wound healed again, to feed the monstrous
bird the next day. There was no end to this torment: Prometheus was immortal.
Death could not limit his pain, and he was sustained only by the joyful thought
of how much grief he had caused the gods.
Even the gods’ anger abates in time. After thirty thousand years had gone by,
Zeus reprieved the tormented trickster, sending his favorite son Heracles to kill
the eagle. True, Prometheus was still unable to move, but half of his agony was
over. In gratitude, he gave Heracles information that would help him complete
one of his labors, as we shall see.
Still the remorseless years rolled by, and the time came when Zeus conceived a
desire for the sea goddess Thetis. This was the moment Prometheus had been

desire for the sea goddess Thetis. This was the moment Prometheus had been
waiting for, for he knew a secret: that Thetis was destined to bear a son who
would be greater than his father. If Zeus was the father, then, his son by Thetis
would overthrow him, just as Zeus had overthrown his own father Cronus. He
bargained the information for his release, which Zeus allowed him, provided that
he never again made trouble. He was to wear a garland forever, encircling his
head in remembrance of the chains that had bound him. Prometheus was content
to sink into obscurity: along with his intelligence, his human wards had inherited
the power to tease and trouble the gods. His work was done.
For the theft of fire, Zeus punished Prometheus, but men suffered his wrath as
well. Of course: he couldn’t allow such a direct threat to his authority to pass as
if unnoticed. But the time hasn’t yet come for that tale. Let’s turn now to the
immortal gods. Let’s leave humankind, for a while, with some hope.

Prometheus was chained to the Caucasian mountains, where an eagle feasted
daily upon his liver.[2]

Chapter Two
THE ASCENT OF THE OLYMPIAN GODS
In the Beginning
In the beginning, there was … nothing. Picture it as a gap, a void filled with
swirling movement, not emptiness. There was nothing that held together,
nothing distinct, nothing measurable by any form of measurement. There were
no borders or limits, but within the void appeared Gaia, the Earth, just as when
building a house the foundation comes first.
And in the depths at the lowest extent of deep-rooted Gaia was Tartarus, the
place of punishment, the world beneath the world. Earth and Tartarus emerged
spontaneously, but Love is the fundamental creative force. Love, coeval with
Gaia, governs the subsequent stages of creation.
Gaia and Tartarus were surrounded by the darkness of night, but Night blended
with Darkness and bore Brightness and Day. And so time came into being,
measured by the onward-rolling day and night. By herself Gaia, the Earth, bore
Uranus, the Heaven, to cover her completely. Heaven lay with Earth, and she
conceived and bore Ocean, the water encircling the continents of Earth, and
Tethys, the waterways within the continents of Earth.

From the prolific mingling of the waters the earth was clothed, and from the
mingling of Earth and Uranus there emerged, among many other children, the

mingling of Earth and Uranus there emerged, among many other children, the
Titans, twelve in number: Cronus and Rhea, Hyperion and Theia, Iapetus (the
father of Prometheus), and the rest of the gods of old. Their names now are
mostly unfamiliar, for these were the days of yore. Under the rule of Cronus the
world was of a different order, and it is not easy to comprehend it, except to say
that it was primitive.
Wide-shining Theia bore for Hyperion the blazing sun, the radiant moon, and the
rosy-fingered light of dawn, which gently fills the sky even before the sun rises.
Helios the sun-god drives his golden chariot from east to west, and sails in a
golden vessel each night on Ocean back again to the east. Helios had a son called
Phaethon, the gleamer, who was allowed by his father, in a moment of
weakness, to drive his chariot for one day, much later in the earth’s history. But
none apart from Helios can control the blazing chariot drawn by four
indefatigable steeds, and Phaethon hurtled to earth in a ball of flame. Much of
the earth’s surface was scorched and became desert, and the skin of those
dwelling there was burned black for all time. Phaethon’s sisters were turned into
trees, and the heavy tears of grief they shed for their brother solidified as amber.

Disaster struck when Helios allowed Phaethon to drive the Sun chariot for a
day.[3]
In later times, sisters Selene, the moon, and Eos, the dawn, fell in love with
mortal men. Endymion was a shepherd, who slept each night in a mountainside
cave in Caria. Selene caught a glimpse of him from on high, and as her pale
gleam fell on his features she fell too, such is the force of love’s attraction.
Every night she lay with him while he lay cradled in sleep, not knowing that his
reality was stranger than any dream. Selene loved him so much that she could
not bear the thought that he would age and die. She implored Zeus to let him
remain as he was, and the father of gods and men granted Endymion eternal
youth and eternal sleep—except that he awoke each night when Selene visited
him to satisfy her longing.

Eos enjoyed numerous affairs, for once she went to bed with Ares, and in jealous
anger Aphrodite condemned her to restless ardor. One of those with whom she
fell in love was the proud hunter, Tithonus, as handsome as are all the princes of
Troy; and she begged Zeus that her mate should live forever.
Zeus granted her wish, but the love-befuddled goddess had forgotten to ask also
for eternal youth for her beloved. In the days when their passion was new, the
graceful goddess bore Memnon, destined to rule the Ethiopians for a time and
meet his end before the walls of Troy. But as the years and centuries passed,
Tithonus aged and shrank, until he was no more than a grasshopper, and Eos
shut him away and loved him no more. If asked, he would say that death was his
dearest wish.
And Helios too dallied for a while with a mortal maid, Leucothoe by name. He
thought of nothing but her, and for the sake of a glimpse of her beauty he would
rise too early and set too late, after dawdling on his way, until all the seasons of
the earth were awry. The god had to consummate his lust, or the chaos would
continue. He appeared to her as her own mother, and dismissed her
handmaidens, so that he could be alone with her. Then he revealed himself to
her; she was flattered by his ardent attention and put up no resistance. But when
her father found out he buried her alive by night, so that the sun might not see
the deed, and by the time morning came there was nothing he could do to revive
his beloved. But, planted as she was in the soil, he transformed her into the
frankincense bush, so that her sweet fragrance should please the gods for all
time.
Now, Uranus, the starry sky, loathed his children—not just the twelve Titans, but
the three Cyclopes, one-eyed giants, and the three monstrous Hecatonchires,
each with fifty heads and a hundred hands. Every time a child was born, Uranus
seized it and shoved it back inside its mother’s womb, deep in the darkness of
Earth’s innards.
In the agony of her unceasing labor pains, Earth called out to the children within
her, imploring their help. But they were still and cowered in fear of their mighty
father, all except crafty Cronus, the youngest son. Only he was bold enough to
undertake the impious deed. He took the sickle of adamant that his mother had
forged and lay in wait for his father. Soon Uranus came to lie with Earth and
spread himself over her completely. Cronus emerged from the folds where he
was hiding, wielding his sickle, and with one mighty stroke he sliced off his
father’s genitals and tossed them far back, over his shoulder.

father’s genitals and tossed them far back, over his shoulder.

After Cronus defeated his father Uranus, his siblings were freed from Gaia’s
tortured womb.[4]
The blood as it scattered here and there, and spilled on the soil, gave rise to the
Giants and the Furies, the ghouls who sometimes, with grim irony, are called the
Eumenides, the kindly ones. They protect the sacred bonds of family life, and
hunt down those who deliberately murder blood kin. They drink the blood of the
victim and hound the hapless criminal to madness and the blessed release of
death. They are jet black, their breath is foul, and their eyes ooze suppurating
pus.
But the genitals themselves fell into the surging sea near the island of Cythera
and were carried on currents to sea-girt Cyprus. From the foam that spurted from
the genitals grew a fair maiden, and as she stepped out from the white-capped
waves onto the island grass grew under her slender feet. The Seasons attended
her and placed on her head a crown of gold, and fitted her with earrings of
copper and golden flowers; around her neck they placed finely wrought golden
necklaces, that the eyes of all might be drawn to her shapely breasts.
Her name was Aphrodite, the foam-born goddess, and there is none among men
and gods who can resist even her merest glance. She is known as the Lady of
Cythera and the Lady of Cyprus; and henceforth Love became her attendant.
Cronus, the youngest of the children of Uranus, usurped his father’s place as
ruler of the world—but inherited his fear, the typical fear of a tyrant. For his
parents warned him that he in his turn would be replaced by one of his sons.
Each time, then, that a child was born to Rhea, his sister-wife, he swallowed it to
prevent its growth. Five he swallowed in this way: Hestia, Demeter, Hera,
Hades, and Poseidon. Pregnant once more, Rhea appealed to her mother Earth,

Hades, and Poseidon. Pregnant once more, Rhea appealed to her mother Earth,
who promised to rear the sixth child herself. And so, when her time came, Rhea
went and bore Zeus deep inside a Cretan cave, while to Cronus she gave a
boulder, disguised in swaddling clothes, for him to swallow.

Each time Rhea bore a child to Cronus he consumed it.[5]
In the cave on Mount Dicte, the infant Zeus was fed by bees and nursed by
nymphs, daughters of Earth, on goat’s milk, foaming fresh and warm from the
udder. Young men, mountain-dwelling Curetes, wove outside the cave a martial
dance and clashed their spears on their shields to cover the sound of infant
wailing. As he grew older, Amalthea, the keeper of the goat, brought the boy all
the produce of the earth in an old horn.
And so the mountains of Crete are sacred ground, and even now the Cretans

And so the mountains of Crete are sacred ground, and even now the Cretans
summon the god by means of dance, and he replenishes their hearts and their
crops. And Zeus flourished and grew in might, but in his heart he nurtured his
mother’s dreams of vengeance.

War against the Titans
Zeus laid his plans with skill and cunning—with his witchy consort Metis,
whose name means “skill” and “cunning.” There was nothing this shape-shifting
daughter of Ocean and Tethys didn’t know about herbs, and she concocted for
Zeus a powerful drug, strong enough to overcome even mighty Cronus.
Together, and with the help of grandmother Earth, they drugged Cronus with
narcotic honey. And while he was comatose they fed him the emetic.
The result was exactly as intended: Cronus vomited up in order first the boulder,
still wrapped in moldering rags, and then Zeus’ brothers Poseidon and Hades,
and then his sisters Hera and Demeter, and finally Hestia, oldest and youngest.
For the forthcoming war—for war was inevitable—these were Zeus’ bosom
allies. Cronus, for his part, was joined by all his fellow Titans and their
offspring, with the notable exception of Themis, for right was on Zeus’ side and
victory was destined to be his.
Zeus made his headquarters on Mount Olympus in northern Greece, while
Cronus chose Mount Othrys, a little to the south. This was the first war in the
world, and there has been none like it since. For ten years the conflict raged
ceaselessly and without result; for ten years earth and heaven resounded and
shook with the frightful din of battle. Neither the Titans nor the Olympians could
gain the advantage.
Long ago, in the early days of the war, Prometheus, resident on Olympus with
his mother Themis, had offered Zeus some advice. Still imprisoned deep within
Gaia were the Hundred-handers and the Cyclopes. Zeus considered them too
monstrous, too hard to control, but now he was desperate to break the deadlock.
He extracted from them the most solemn oath, that if he released them and
armed them, they would be his grateful allies. The former could hurl boulders
the size of hills with their hundred hands, while the latter, cave-dwelling smiths,
would create for Zeus his weapon of choice, the thunderbolt—the missile that
accompanies a flash of lightning. And at the same time they made weapons for
his brothers in their forge: a trident for Poseidon and a cap of invisibility for
Hades. The earth, the seas, and the heavens resounded as hammers met anvils;
the sparks were as the stars in the sky.

the sparks were as the stars in the sky.
Now Zeus sallied forth from Olympus, the acropolis of the world, and
confronted the enemy face to face. Hurling lightning and thunderbolts in swift
succession, he overwhelmed the enemy. The land blistered and blazed with fire
and the waters boiled; steam and flame rose and filled the sky. It sounded as
though Earth and Heaven had collapsed into each other with a ghastly crash. It
looked as though all the subterranean fires of the earth had boiled up from the
depths and erupted on the surface of the earth.
The heat of Zeus’ missiles enveloped the Titans, and the blazing lightning
blinded them. Meanwhile, Aegicerus, half goat and half fish, the foster brother
of Zeus from the Cretan cave, blew a trumpet blast on his magical conch-shell
and sowed panic in the Titan ranks. And now the Hundred-handers played their
part. As thick and fast as hailstones, huge boulders rained down on the Titans,
darkening the sky and crushing even Cronus. Overcome, the Titans were bound
and sent down to the gloom of Tartarus, from where nothing and no one can
escape but through the pardon of the Ruler of All. It is like a gigantic jar, with
walls of impenetrable bronze, and its entrance is stopped with three layers of
darkness and guarded by the Hundred-handers. It is the place of uttermost
punishment, lying as far beneath the earth as the heaven is above it. Nine days it
would take a blacksmith’s anvil to fall from the edge of heaven to the earth, and
a further nine days still to reach Tartarus. But easy though the descent may be,
the return journey is impossible.
And so the sons of Uranus mostly pass from our knowing, for no bard sings in
praise of the defeated. The noble but misguided Atlas, for allying himself with
his uncle Cronus, is forever compelled to shoulder the tremendous burden of the
heavens. The female Titans—Leto, Memory, Tethys, Phoebe, Themis, Theia,
and Rhea—were allowed to remain under the upper sky, honoring the will of
loud-thundering Zeus. Leto bowed to his desire and on the sacred island of Delos
bore him the twin deities Artemis and Apollo; Memory lay with Zeus and from
her were delivered the divine Muses, nine immortal daughters, patronesses of
culture and all the arts; and Themis gave birth to the three reverend Fates, whom
the unfortunate castigate as blind hags.

The Fates, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, determine the length of a life.[6]
Among the Muses who dwell on Mount Helicon, the province of Calliope is epic
poetry; of Clio, history; of Urania, science; of Euterpe, the music of the pipes; of
Melpomene, tragedy; of Thalia, comedy; of Terpsichore, lyric poetry and dance;
of Erato, love poetry; and of Polymnia, sacred music.
Sweet Muses, delighting in song and dance, but they know also that true sadness
may inspire poets to their greatest work, and like all deities they are proud of
their domain. The nine daughters of Pierus of Pella challenged the goddesses to a
singing contest, and were turned into chattering magpies for their presumption
when they lost. And once Thamyris of Thrace, the foremost musician of his age,
desired to sleep with the Muses, all nine; and his eyes, one blue, one green,
sparkled at the thought. The Muses agreed—if he could demonstrate his

sparkled at the thought. The Muses agreed—if he could demonstrate his
superiority to them as a musician. He lost the contest, and they took his eyes
from him along with his talent. There is a lesson here for a pious man, if he takes
the time to ponder it. It’s a fool who vies against the immortals.
Of the three Fates, Clotho sits with her spindle and whorl, twisting and spinning
out the thread that is assigned for every creature from birth to death. At her left
hand, her sister Lachesis, the dispassionate apportioner, marks the length of the
thread. By their side stands the implacable Atropos, ready to cut the thread at the
chosen point and bring a life to an end. Just as the Fates determine the length of
mortal life, so also the ancient goddesses decide how long prosperity, health, and
peace are to last. And know this: if the length of a life is already determined,
men must act with courage, for they will die anyway when it is their time.

War against the Giants
The Titans were defeated, but still there were challenges to Zeus’ rule. Not long
later—but after many centuries of human time—he had to face the Giants, born
of the blood of Uranus. The Giants had various forms and features, just as do the
children of men, except that in place of legs they had the sinuous strength of
huge snakes, and they were wild and shaggy all over. They were a force for
disorder and chaos, rapists, thieves, and murderers, and they could not be
allowed to co-exist with the new order. Things came to a head when the Giants
rustled the cattle of Helios, the sun-god. It was the last straw. War was declared,
and the uncouth and unkempt Giants stormed heaven with boulders and burning
brands.
There were so many of them that Zeus could not handle them alone, and for the
first time the gods worked together as a team. Even so, they could not prevail
against the hostile mob. For it was foretold that the Giants could be defeated
only by a force that included a mortal. But no mortal then alive would last more
than an instant against the Giants: this was not yet the Age of Heroes. It would
be like pitting a candle flame against a tempest. And the Giants, knowing this,
were sure of their final victory.
Zeus concocted an awful plan. The only human ally he wanted was Heracles, but
Heracles had not yet been born. Zeus reached into the future and pulled Heracles
back through time to help against the Giants. To Heracles, it seemed a lucid
dream, one never to be forgotten—a dream filled with fire and pain and
awesome deeds. In desperation at Zeus’ cunning, Gaia sought a unique herb that

would give her foul children true immortality, even against Heracles. But Zeus,
learning of her quest, forbade the sun and the moon and dawn to shine, so that
Gaia could not find the plant and Zeus plucked it for himself.
The greatest of the Giants was Alcyoneus, who could not be killed while he was
in touch with the land from which he had sprung, the Pallene peninsula. Heracles
shot Alcyoneus with his bow, but no sooner had the Giant crashed to the ground
than he sprang up again, reinvigorated. Heracles was at a loss: again and again
he shot him, and every time the same thing happened. Then wise Athena told
him Alcyoneus’ secret, and summoned indomitable Sleep, and the giant fell into
a deep slumber. While he was asleep, Heracles laid hold of him and dragged him
off Pallene. The Giant awoke, briefly struggled, and breathed his last.
But Porphyrion, equal in might to his brother Alcyoneus, and the leader of the
Giants, overwhelmed the goddess Hera and began to rip off her clothes, desiring
to take her against her will. Zeus stunned the savage Giant with a thunderbolt,
and Heracles finished him off with his bow. Dionysus, surrounded by wild
animals and riding into battle on a donkey whose braying cowed his enemies,
smote Eurytus with his thyrsus staff, while foul Clytius fell before the flaming
brands of the dread witch-goddess Hecate. Mimas died horribly, his body boiled
by molten metal poured from Hephaestus’ crucible.
Fearsome Athena buried Enceladus under Sicily, and then turned to Pallas; she
flayed him alive and wore his raw skin, sticky with blood, as a shield. Poseidon
broke off part of the island of Cos and crushed Polybotes with it. Hermes,
wearing Hades’ cap of invisibility, killed Hippolytus, and Artemis did away with
Gration. Apollo shot out the left eye of Ephialtes, while Heracles’ arrow lodged
deep in the other. The Fates, wielding massive clubs of bronze, crushed the
skulls of Thoas and fierce Agrius. The rest were scattered by Zeus’ thunderbolts
and, to fulfill the prophecy, shot down by Heracles as he raced after them on his
chariot. Gaia implored Zeus for the lives of her children, but he was not to be
swayed. There should be none to challenge him.

“The Fates, wielding massive clubs of bronze, crushed the skulls of Thoas and
fierce Agrius.”[7]
After bitter war, peace came to Olympus. For a brief while, the heavens were
untroubled, and Zeus began to make provisions for his newly acquired realm.
But then there arose a new contender for the throne of the world. Gaia was
saddened by the defeat and death of her offspring, the Giants, born of the blood
of Uranus. But she had to admit that Zeus was proving himself a worthy king.
She devised for him one final test, so that all might see his kingly qualities, or
his humiliation.
Out of her most hidden depths Earth heaved forth a terrifying monster. A
hundred snake-heads sprouted from Typhoeus’ shoulders, and the forked
tongues flickering from their mouths matched the fiery flashes from two hundred
eyes. But the sounds the gigantic creature emitted were the worst: not just the
hissing of snakes, but the baying of hounds, the bellowing of bulls, and the roar
of lions; not just recognizable and comprehensible sounds, but sounds that were
never heard before or since, that had meaning, but no meaning anyone could
grasp. The part-human, part-serpentine body of the beast was as strong as a
mountain, and he advanced on Olympus with his confidence high, ready to
institute a new and terrible order for gods and men.
At the sight of the monster all the gods fled from Olympus to Egypt and
disguised themselves as innocuous animals. But Zeus came down from the high

disguised themselves as innocuous animals. But Zeus came down from the high
mountain to meet the challenge. Had there been onlookers, it would have seemed
as though the land and the sea were consumed by a horrific storm. Swollen
purple and black clouds shrouded the battle, and all that could be seen were
flashes of fire and lightning, and the billowing and surging and whirling of the
clouds. The noise was abominable—the crashing of the thunder, the crack of
lightning, the hiss of flames extinguished in the sea, the cries of pain from
Typhoeus, magnified a hundred times by a hundred howling heads.
Zeus attacked without mercy, blinding the creature with fire and shriveling his
heads black with lightning. Typhoeus leapt into the sea to extinguish the flames
that erupted all over his body, but Zeus smote him again and again, until the
rocks of the battlefield melted like wax, the sea boiled, and the tormented,
smoking ground shook and cracked open black and gaping maws. And Zeus
finally hurled the monster into the greatest of these chasms all the way down to
Tartarus, and piled Mount Etna on top and pounded its roots deep into the
ground, to contain Typhoeus forever. Only once in a while is he able to wriggle
a bit, and then mortal men, little that they know, say that the Sicilian volcano is
rumbling.
But the sounds of the volcano are no more than faint echoes of his voices of old,
and its power the merest sliver of Typhoeus’ former strength. All he left behind
were his children, the winds of destruction and the many-headed monsters:
Cerberus, the hell-hound that guards the entrance to the underworld, with his
three savage heads and tails of venomous serpents; the nine-headed, marshdwelling Hydra; two-headed Orthus, protector of the red cattle of Geryon; and
the Chimera, whose foreparts were those of a lion, but her tail was a living
serpent, and a goat made up her trunk, and all three heads hissed and roared and
spat with indiscriminate fury.

Zeus and His Brothers
Zeus had cleared the world of the most potent forces of disorder and chaos, a
burden that would also fall on some of the heroes of later time, in proportion to
their lesser abilities. By force of arms, he had confirmed his right to the high,
golden throne of heavenly Olympus.
In order to ensure ongoing stability, every major domain of life on earth was
given into the care of one of the gods, so that each had his or her unique
province and none should be dissatisfied. Above, there spread the wide heavens;
below, the misty underworld stretched down to Tartarus, the place of woe;

below, the misty underworld stretched down to Tartarus, the place of woe;
between lay the surface of the earth. Great Zeus, the wielder of the thunderbolt
and lightning, took for himself the heavens and the halls of Olympus, but treated
his two brothers as equals. Dark Hades became lord of the underworld, while
horse-loving Poseidon gained the surface of the earth, and especially its waters.
And so Zeus is the cloud-gatherer, the hurler of thunderbolts, the shining lord of
sky and weather. Men pray to him for many things, for all the other gods obey
his commands; but especially they pray for sufficient rain to impregnate the
earth, so that their flocks fatten and their crops multiply.
From high Olympus he looks down on the earth and ponders its fate.
Effortlessly, he raises a man up or brings him low, makes the crooked straight
and humbles the proud. The earth trembles at his nod. If he descends to earth, he
comes as a flash of lightning, and the scorched ground where he alights from his
chariot is sacred. His majesty is second to none, and he may also appear as a
soaring eagle, aloof and magnificent. He speaks to mortal men through the
rustling of his sacred oak at Dodona; the oracle at Olympia is his, and the fouryearly games there are sacred to him.
Men think of Poseidon as the trident-bearing lord of the sea, and they pray to
him for safety, for they and their craft are puny, and he is mighty and of
uncertain temper. But he is also the earth-shaker, the maker of earthquakes,
when the very land seems to ripple like the sea and yearn to be water. And he
delights in horses, for a free-running horse flows like a mighty wave, with
muscles gleaming and tail streaming. All he has to do is stamp a hoof, or strike a
blow with his trident, and sweet water gushes from solid rock. His wife is
Amphitrite, who dwells in the booming of the sea and the whisper of the seashell, though he had children by many another nymph and goddess too. Poseidon
drives over the sea in a chariot drawn by horses with brazen hoofs and golden
manes, and at his approach the waves die down and the sea gives him passage.

Poseidon’s realm is the sea, but he is also the earth-shaker, and patron of the
horse.[8]
What can be said about Hades? No living man has ever beheld his face, and the
dead do not return from his mirthless domain. He is the invincible one, for death
awaits all; with his staff, he drives all in their time into the echoing vaults of his
palace. No one knows for sure where the entrance is to his subterranean realm.
Some say that it is in the far west, where the sun goes down to darkness; others
that certain caves or chasms conceal an entrance.
Through the gloom of his underworld realm flit the feeble remnants of men of
old, pale spirits, gibbering and forlorn, and dust and mist is all their food; and the
River Styx, never to be re-crossed, surrounds the domain of Hades, as Ocean

River Styx, never to be re-crossed, surrounds the domain of Hades, as Ocean
surrounds the continents of the earth and the Milky Way surrounds the heavens.
Charon the ferryman, dreaded by all, transports the dead across the river to their
eternal home, if they bring the coin to pay him. Otherwise, they remain as pale
ghosts, whimpering feebly on the banks of the river and imploring all-comers for
a proper burial; but those who come are only the dead themselves, and can help
no more.
This is the doom that awaits us, except for the few, righteous or unrighteous.
Those whose brief dances have pleased the gods are allowed to dwell forever on
the Isles of the Blessed, or in the Elysian Fields, where temperate breezes gently
stir meadow flowers, nurtured by sweet springs and showers. But warmongers
and tyrants, murderers and rapists, perpetrators of all foul and abnormal crimes
against the gods or hospitality or parents, are cast into the depths of Tartarus and
suffer endless torment. Hades is the lord of the dead, but his lady Persephone
shares his powers, and the souls of the dead are judged by three stern judges: the
two wise sons of Europa by Zeus, Minos and Rhadamanthys of Crete, and
Aeacus, son of Zeus and Aegina. And Hades is also Pluto, the giver of wealth,
because all crops arise out of the under-earth, and he bears rich minerals deep in
his secret places.

Chapter Three
THE GODS OF OLYMPUS
Zeus the King
The regime of Zeus is marked by order. Essentially, the world is stable: goats are
not born to men or cows, but only to goats, and deformed monstrosities—hybrid
creatures, or distorted versions of the species—are no longer born, or only
rarely. The sun rises where it should day by day; the seasons follow in an orderly
fashion. This was the change that marked the end of the era of Cronus and the
beginning of our familiar world. And it was the job of many of the heroes to
tame the world.

The will of Zeus is that the world should continue as a stable entity. Just as no
single one of the natural elements of earth, water, fire, and air prevails, so the
power of one deity cannot usurp pride of place. Each of the gods is, on his or her
own, invincible. If Aphrodite prevailed, the world would be nothing but
copulating couples; if Ares prevailed, the madness of war would be all that we
know. The cloud-gatherer has no need to move from his throne. He rules by
wisdom, but he brooks no disagreement. Even his wife Hera, when she
displeased him, had her hands bound with golden chains, and was suspended
from heaven on a rope, with anvils attached to her feet. The strength of Zeus is
such that it surpasses that of all the other gods put together, and they dare not
oppose his will, even if they desired it.
The gods that dwell with Zeus on high Olympus are these: Aphrodite, primordial

The gods that dwell with Zeus on high Olympus are these: Aphrodite, primordial
deity; Zeus’ sister-wife Hera, and his other sisters, Demeter and Hestia; and the
children of Zeus: Athena, Ares, Hephaestus, the twins Apollo and Artemis,
Hermes, and Dionysus. These are the immortal gods who dwell on Olympus,
and ichor flows in their veins. They are many, but their purpose is one: to carry
out the will of the Father of All. He has no need to move from his throne. He
rules by wisdom, but he brooks no disagreement. Even his wife Hera, when she
displeased him, had her hands bound with golden chains, and was suspended
from heaven on a rope, with anvils attached to her feet. The strength of Zeus is
such that it surpasses that of all the other gods put together, and they dare not
oppose his will, even if they desired it.

Athena the wise is the goddess of craft and the skills of warfare.[9]

Hera
Sister-wife of lord Zeus, white-armed Hera preserves the sanctity of marriage
and guards the keys of wedlock. Unlike him, she has no time for the frivolity of
extramarital affairs. She is held in respect as the golden-throned queen of
heaven, and she is called cow-eyed, for she looks on the world with stately and
serene regality; all mortal queens should aspire to be like her. She it is to whom
women pray for a good marriage, and for healthy offspring, for along with her
daughter Eileithyia, Hera is the goddess of childbirth.
Though she sleeps with her husband—and it is said that meadows bloom beneath
them as they make love—she renews her virginity each year by bathing in a
spring at Nauplia. She is virgin, wife, and matron, and all womanly life is hers.
When Heracles was born, Zeus brought him to Hera to suckle, hoping thereby to
make his favored son immortal. But the strapping babe bit her nipple, and in
shock Hera pushed him away. The divine milk spraying from her breasts formed
the Milky Way, though some fell to earth and from the rich drops sprouted purewhite lilies.
Though Hera is known to be the faithful consort of the Ruler of All, yet the tale
is told of Ixion, king of wide lands in Thessaly, who fell prey to his passion for
the fair queen of heaven when he came to the hallowed halls of Olympus, invited
guest of Zeus himself. For Zeus had offered to purify Ixion after he had killed
his father-in-law. Ixion sought to betray his host, another heinous crime, but
Zeus was not caught unawares, and fashioned a replica of his wife from mist.
This cloud, Nephele, lay with Ixion, who believed he made love to Hera.
But disaster comes to all who seek to deceive the gods. For his transgression, for
desiring golden-sandaled Hera, though he lay not with her in truth, Zeus had him
lashed to a fiery wheel, which revolves through the universe for eternity.
As for Nephele, though she was more form than substance, yet she conceived
from Ixion and bore Centaurus, a son to break a mother’s heart, for he honored
neither men nor the laws of the gods. He coupled with the mares on Pelion’s
slopes and fathered the race of Centaurs, half-man and half-horse, with strong
appetites for carnal pleasure and destruction.

For the sin of desiring Hera, Ixion spins forever lashed to a fiery wheel.[10]

Hestia
Hestia is the first born of Cronus and Rhea. Hers is the hearth and its sacred fire,
the source of life and prosperity to every home and every settlement, and her
dark hair flows with rich oil. Her seat is at the center of every home there has
ever been. When land grows scarce and younger brothers band together to seek a
new home abroad, they carry with them the sacred fire of the mother city, to
bless their venture. Although she was wooed by her brother Poseidon and her
nephew Apollo, she swore on the head of Zeus to remain a virgin, so that she
would dwell equally and impartially at the heart of every household. She has no
need of a temple, for the hearth fire of every community and household is her
sanctuary, a place of rest and asylum, from which none can be turned away. She
it is who oversees the introduction of new members of the family, and at their
leaving she is extinguished and renewed. But the exemplary goddess never
leaves Zeus’ wide halls, and little rumor or fable of her has reached the ears of
man.

Demeter

Demeter is the goddess of cereal crops—of lovely wheat and barley, oats and
rye. Without her blessing, mortal men face sure starvation, for her fare is staple
in every culture. She watches over the plowing and the sowing, the reaping and
the threshing, and the storage of crops. She is every ear of grain on every stem
that has ever grown. She is the foundation of law and morality, for without food
in their bellies men turn to crime.
Now, Demeter had by Zeus a daughter, and she loved Persephone with all her
heart. But Zeus promised the maiden goddess to his brother Hades, dark lord of
the underworld. One day, Persephone was out gathering flowers with her friends,
the Ocean nymphs, in the garden of the gods. And Gaia, the Earth, put forth a
new flower, never before seen, of especial beauty, the narcissus; and the
sweetness of its fragrance made the earth smile and the seas laugh aloud.
Persephone, straying from her friends, found the precious flower. But when she
reached out her hand for the pale bloom, the earth split open and Hades emerged
on his chariot and snatched her away. The maiden’s cries to her father fell on
deaf ears. No one heard her, none of the gods, save Hecate in her distant cave,
conjuring spirits. And in a moment Persephone’s screams of terror faded as
Hades bore her down, down into the depths of the underworld—but a last, faint
cry came to the ears of her mother, borne by a kindly wind.
Demeter lit two torches in the fires of Etna, and for nine days she roamed the
broad earth over hill and dale, denying herself sleep and rest, but nowhere was
her daughter to be found. All she found was a bunch of dried narcissus blossoms
lying on the healed earth. Poseidon took advantage of her distress to press his
suit, and when Demeter changed herself into a mare to avoid his attentions, he
became a stallion and had his way with her. And in due course of time she gave
birth to a wonderful stallion called Arion, and a daughter whose name is known
only to the initiated.
On the tenth day somber Hecate came and told her what little she knew—that
her daughter had been abducted. Together they went to Helios, the sun-god, who
sees all, and he explained that it was the will of Zeus that Persephone should be
the bride of his brother Hades, and consoled her with the thought that Zeus’
equal was no mean husband for her daughter.
But Demeter was not to be consoled, nor was she of a mind to give up. She
wanted nothing now to do with the gods of Olympus, who had betrayed her and
her daughter. She disguised herself as a mortal and roamed over the earth

her daughter. She disguised herself as a mortal and roamed over the earth
ceaselessly, in grief and despair. Only Hesperus, the evening star, could
persuade her to quench her parched throat with a little water. For mother and
daughter are inseparable, and are ever worshipped together.
At last she came to Eleusis, where Celeus was king, and seated herself by the
Maiden’s Well in the shade of an olive tree. There came to the well to collect
water the daughters of Celeus, and they addressed her with the respect due to her
venerable years. For Demeter had disguised herself as an elderly woman named
Doso, a refugee from pirates. And in this matronly guise, she begged for work.
Lovely Callidice answered her: “Our mother Metaneira has but lately borne a
son. No one in this town would turn you away, for your demeanor is stately and
godlike, but let me ask her. She would appreciate help in rearing our brother
Demophoön.” When the girls returned from the well, Metaneira was delighted
and told them to bring Doso back home. And the goddess followed them, her
heart grieving and her head veiled. But when she stood in the doorway,
Metaneira looked up and for a moment saw her as a goddess, only to dismiss the
vision.
The weeks and months passed, and in the goddess’s tender care the babe grew
bonny and blithe. For by day Demeter anointed him with divine ambrosia, and at
night she buried him in the embers of the fire, for she knew how to make him
immortal. Her heart was filled with the joy of tending to the boy, though she
yearned ceaselessly for Persephone.
But one night Metaneira saw Demeter burying her son in the coals and screamed
out loud for sheer terror. In fury, Demeter snatched the boy from the fire and
cast him aside. “Fools! Ignorant mortals!” she cried, revealing herself in her
godhood. “I would have made your son deathless, but now he shall be no more
blessed than others, except that he has been nursed by a goddess. For I am
Demeter, and all worship me.” And she commanded the people of Eleusis to
build her a temple, where her mysteries would be celebrated for all time.
But Demeter mourned her missing daughter with fresh tears, and devised a
terrible punishment for gods and men. Crops were stillborn in the barren soil, or,
if they appeared at all, it was only to wither with blight. First their cattle died,
their sheep and goats, and then human beings themselves were starving to death.
Moreover, the gods were not receiving their due in sacrifices, for there was
nothing for men to give.

This was intolerable to Zeus, and he sent many-hued Iris, the rainbow messenger
of the gods, arcing down to where Demeter sat in Eleusis. “Come back!”
implored Iris. “Let Zeus the cloud-gatherer make you welcome once more in the
high halls of Olympus!” But Demeter hardened her heart and shut her ears. She
vowed that never again would she tread the paths of fragrant Olympus unless she
could do so with her daughter at her side.
Taking matters in hand, Zeus sent swift-darting Hermes to escort Persephone out
of the underworld and into the light of day—to rejoin her mother. “Come with
me,” he said, “or all mortal men will perish, whose lives are but the shadow of a
dream, and the gods will have no one to honor them.”
Hades understood, and turned to his bride, who was seated beside him, as befits
the queen of the underworld; but still in her heart she pined for her mother. “Go,
my dear!” he said. “Console your sorrowing mother. And when you return, you
shall have high honor as my wife.” But he did not entirely trust her to return of
her own accord, and he gave her the sweet seed of a pomegranate to eat, the
forbidden food of the dead, so that she was bound to come back, and not to dwell
forever on Olympus with her dark-cloaked mother.
Hades loaned Hermes his own chariot, and Hermes sped with Persephone by his
side to Eleusis. The reunion of mother and daughter was as joyful and tearful as
may be imagined—but suddenly Demeter pulled out of their embrace, sensing a
trick. “Tell me, daughter,” she asked, “did you eat anything while you were there
in the underworld? If you did not, you will be free to dwell with me and the
immortal gods forever on Olympus. If you ate even the slightest morsel, you are
bound to return, to live as Hades’ bride in the underworld for a third of every
year; for so the Fates have ordained it. And for that time, the soil shall be barren
in its mourning.”

Demeter and Persephone’s reunion was bitter-sweet; now the girl must return
each year to Hades.[11]
So it is. Demeter returned to Olympus and the fields began once more to produce
their rich harvests. And Triptolemus, the son of Celeus, received from her the
gift of agriculture, and became her missionary. On a chariot drawn by dragons,
he traveled the earth, teaching men how to cultivate the soil. But the time comes
every year when Persephone goes back to dread Hades and takes her seat beside
him as his bride, with somber Hecate as her handmaid. On earth, the fruits begin
to fade and the leaves of the trees to fall; but when she returns to the light of
Olympus and the upper world, the flowers bloom afresh and roots spread deep
and wide in the fertile soil.
So Demeter has the respect of the gods who live on Olympus, and dwells there
forever in high honor. Once she took a human lover, Iasion, in a thrice-plowed
furrow, but hard-hearted Zeus blasted the man with his thunderbolt for his

furrow, but hard-hearted Zeus blasted the man with his thunderbolt for his
boldness. And she too was once angry with a mortal man and punished him.
Erysichthon, grandson of Poseidon, took twenty of his men, full giants in size, to
cut down trees to make a banqueting hall, and chose trees from a grove beloved
of the goddess. When the tree nymphs cried out loud in their pain, she appeared
to him as her own priestess and tried to dissuade him, but he rashly threatened
her with an ax. “Away!” he cried. “Or I fix my keen blade in your flesh!”
For his greed and impiety she cursed him with insatiable and relentless hunger.
However much he ate, he was never satisfied, and his flesh never filled out, until
he shrank to no more than skin and bones. Hunger lay deep in his belly, and he
ate everything in his house, including the cat, so that the vermin ran free. And
then he was reduced, the son of a king, to begging at the crossroads for stale
crusts and rancid refuse. Beware the gods! May care and moderation be your
watchwords!

Aphrodite
Sing of Aphrodite, all you Muses! Sing of her pale loveliness, that no man can
resist! Sing of the fair-crowned, laughter-loving goddess, born in the foam off
Cyprus, wife of Hephaestus and lover of grim Ares! For her the seas grow calm,
the meadows put forth flowers and butterflies, the storms abate. For her gardens
bloom. In her train wild wolves and panthers follow with adoration in their eyes
and tails wagging in submission. The dove is hers, blessed, smiling Aphrodite,
weaver of charms, and her attendants are the Graces and Eros, who is Love. Hers
is the allure of sex, hers the magic girdle that makes any woman irresistible.
Sometimes she cares not where she finds a lover, but sex within wedlock is her
first domain and lawfully begotten children; and the first prostitutes were women
of Cyprus who denied her divinity and were henceforth compelled to bear the
shame of selling their bodies to all and sundry. For the goddess may bring honor,
but she may also bring disgrace.

Aphrodite, born in the foam off Cyprus, is the irresistible embodiment of love
and sex.[12]
Now, Pygmalion was horror-struck by these whores, and denied himself a wife
or the pleasures of the marriage bed. But he made a statue of ivory, as white as
snow, and made it more beautiful than any living woman. So lifelike was the
statue that you would have sworn it had merely paused for a moment before
continuing on its way. And Pygmalion fell in love with his creation, kissed it and
caressed it gently for fear of bruising its pale loveliness, and called it Galatea. He
brought it gifts and love tokens, and dressed it in the finest clothes and jewelry.
It was the day of Aphrodite’s festival, and everyone turned out for the
procession. Pygmalion accompanied his offering at the altar of the goddess with
a prayer, which he dared not utter aloud. But kindly Aphrodite understood his
need and the flame flared bright on her altar. When Pygmalion returned home,
he greeted his statue with a kiss—and it seemed to him that she was warmer,
softer than before. Cautiously, but with rising anticipation, he looked into her
face and saw beautiful eyes shining back at him with equal measures of love and
astonishment. He touched her breasts, caressed her body. She was alive! His
unspoken prayer had been answered! Praise be to the goddess!

Pygmalion yearned for his beloved sculpture to live, and Aphrodite answered his
fervent prayer.[13]
The grandson of Pygmalion was Cinyras, and he in his turn had a daughter
called Myrrha. Though courted by many for her beauty, Aphrodite inflamed
Myrrha with an unholy passion for her father, for her mother had boasted that
her daughter was more fair than the goddess. Myrrha lay awake night after night,
wrestling with this demon, consumed by her ungodly passion. Eventually, with
the help of a servant, she consummated her love in the secret spaces of dark
night. When Cinyras found out that he had been sleeping with his own daughter,
he was terrified and filled with anger. To hate one’s father is a lesser crime than
to love him like this. As she fled from his wrath, Myrrha prayed to the gods for

deliverance, and was turned into the myrrh tree, forever shedding bitter tears.
But Myrrha was pregnant and the child continued to grow inside the tree, until
his day came. The baby boy was born, and tended by nymphs, and his name was
Adonis.
The child, so unlawfully begotten, was so lovely that Aphrodite wanted to keep
him for herself, and she hid him in a chest, and gave him to Persephone for
safekeeping. But Persephone peeked inside the chest, and wanted the child for
herself. The cries of the quarreling goddesses came to the ears of Zeus on
Olympus, and he decreed that the boy would spend a third of the year with each
of the two goddesses, and a third of the year wherever and with whomsoever he
chose. And fair Adonis chose to stay with Aphrodite for that third of the year as
well.
Adonis grew up to be the ideal of young masculinity, and Aphrodite’s heart was
pierced. Love shook her mind like a storm wind falling on tall trees. She was so
much in love that she shunned the lofty halls of Olympus, and lingered no more
in the shade on soft pillows, but joined her lover every day in his hunting, until
her fair skin was darkened and scratched.
But one day, when Aphrodite was not with him, Adonis was fatally gored by a
wild boar, the most savage and unpredictable of the huntsman’s quarry. Even the
best have been known to fail, and this boar was sent by Ares, Aphrodite’s
jealous lover. Aloft in her chariot, trim-ankled Aphrodite heard the youth’s
dying groans and raced down, only to find him a corpse. With a prayer to
Persephone, she sprinkled nectar in a death rite on the boy’s spilled blood, and a
delicate flower sprang up. Like Adonis, the anemone clings poorly to life and
spreads its frail beauty for but a brief spell. And ever after women mourn in the
name of Adonis the uncertain swiftness of life’s passing.
Adonis was not the first mortal man to receive the fair goddess’s love, but his
wretched predecessor had been a puppet manipulated by divine intrigues. Zeus
wanted to teach sly Aphrodite a lesson. She had proved very expert at causing
other gods to fall for humans, but she had always stood apart from such unions
herself. So the lord of gods and men showered handsome Anchises, who tended
cattle in the hills above Troy, with the essence of virility. So smitten was the
golden-haired goddess that she would let nothing stand in the way of their love.
She returned straight away to Cypriot Paphos, to her great temple, adorned with
star and crescent moon, and there the Graces bathed her and anointed her with
divinely perfumed oil of ambrosia, heavenly in its sweetness. But deep in her

divinely perfumed oil of ambrosia, heavenly in its sweetness. But deep in her
aching heart she knew that Anchises was a mortal, due to die.

The good-natured Graces attend Aphrodite along with Eros, the primordial lord
of passion.[14]
That night she found her beloved alone in the hills. She appeared to him in the
form of a ripe young virgin, and the moonlight silvered the swell of her breasts.
Anchises met the passionate longing in her gaze; he loosened her willing girdle
and, all unknowing, made love to a goddess. When he awoke, Aphrodite showed
herself to him in her true form, and he was afraid and cast down his eyes. He
knew that those who sleep with goddesses lose their potency ever after. But she
said: “Fear not! For the beds of the gods are not unproductive, and I shall bear

for you a son, Aeneas. He shall be raised in the mountains by nymphs, and his
children’s children will rule the earth!” And so it came to pass. Aeneas escaped
from the sack of Troy, bearing his father on his back, and, after many
adventures, founded the seven-hilled city of Rome. But Anchises boasted of his
night with Aphrodite, and was crippled for his arrogance.
Without Aphrodite, the weaver of snares, Paris would never have won fair
Helen, whose face launched a thousand ships. Without Aphrodite, Hippomenes
would never have loosened the girdle of majestic Atalanta. The stately daughter
of Schoeneus of Boeotia delighted in nothing so much as hunting. She let all her
suitors know that she would wed only the one who could beat her in a crosscountry race. She was fair of face and slender of body, so her suitors were many,
but none could defeat her, and for all the price of defeat was death. Often she
would give the hapless man a head start, and then run after him and kill him
when she caught up; for they ran bearing shield and sword. It was not that she
hated men, but an oracle had warned her to beware of marriage.
But Hippomenes, son of Megareus, loved the tall maiden and was determined to
wed her. He brought with him three golden apples, imbued by Aphrodite with
irresistible charm. When he and Atalanta raced, he rolled one apple in front of
her and, tempted, she picked it up. This delayed her, but soon she caught
Hippomenes up again—and he rolled the second apple. And then the third was
enough to allow him to reach the finishing line before her. True to her vow, she
happily married Hippomenes, but her foolish husband forgot to thank Aphrodite
for the gift of the apples. In punishment, the slender-ankled goddess had the two
lovers comport themselves with passionate indiscretion in the shrine of the
Mother of All, who turned them for their sin into sexless lions to draw her
chariot. So the oracle was true that told Atalanta to beware of marriage. By such
stories as these we may come to some little understanding of the power and
nature of the gods.
By Hermes, Aphrodite bore Hermaphroditus. One day, the youth was wandering
in the hills of Caria when he came across a beautiful pool, limpid and fresh. It
was the home of the nymph Salmacis, and she was unable to resist her desire for
the handsome lad. When he undressed and entered the pool to bathe, she stripped
off her clothes and joined him. The virgin boy was frightened and tried to fight
her off, but Salmacis clung to him and entwined herself around him. “You shall
never escape me!” she cried. “May the gods hear my prayer: let us never be
separated!” From then on they became as one being, but with both male and

female attributes. In his distress Hermaphroditus cried out to his parents, that
they should curse the pool. And ever thereafter, any man who steps into the pool
emerges less than a man.
By Dionysus Aphrodite bore Priapus, the lecherous god of gardens. With his
gnome-like figure and enormous, swollen phallus, he scares all evil from the
gardens of those who worship and pray to him, and his curses fall on those who
presume to trespass on ground that is under his protection. He it was who taught
infant Ares first to dance, and only then to make war.

In the presence of Aphrodite even Ares, god of war, is left defenseless.[15]

Ares
When men meet in hand-to-hand combat, as they frequently do in this Age of
Iron, there is Ares. His domain is not strategy, not distance killing, but the
frenzy, the rage, the screaming madness born of the stark immediacy of killing
or being killed, when you can smell the breath and salt sweat of your adversary.
Ares is the madness, and he is the most feared and hated of the gods, for there is
no one and nothing, save only Father Zeus, who can control his lawlessness.
At the same time there is no god to match him for virility, for only men of
courage can be possessed by him, while others shrink and flee. Goldenhelmeted, bronze-armored, strong-fisted Ares launches himself eagerly at every
battlefield, and if he is seen by mortal men, it is as a dark storm hovering over
the combatants, and he moves with the muscular menace of a wild boar. He is
the war whoop, and his sons are Fear and Terror, and goat-footed Pan rides by
his side to panic those who are destined to be the losers. At Ares’ shout the
mountains tremble, the sky darkens, and all creatures run for cover.

Now, Ares, born of Hera, fathered heroic warriors on a number of mortal
women, but his natural partner is and always was Aphrodite. As the Magnesian
stone attracts iron, so the two of them are drawn to each other. And though
Aphrodite was given by Zeus to Hephaestus, Ares scorned her marriage and
seduced the fair goddess, though she was not unwilling. None knew of their
affair, but in time they were seen by Helios, the sun-god, who told lame
Hephaestus. In his wrath, the cuckolded god went straight to his workshop, and
made a net of gossamer strands, so fine that they were invisible even to immortal
eyes, and so strong that not even the god of war could break them in his rage. It
was as though the net were made out of the strength of non-things: the stillness
of dawn, the sinews of the winds, the potential of an acorn, the sound of a
bluebell. And he cunningly fastened the web-like trap to Aphrodite’s bed.
Then Hephaestus took his leave of lofty Olympus and pretended to go to the
island of Lemnos, his beloved retreat. Ares wasted no time. As soon as he saw
the blacksmith god limp away, he went straight to Aphrodite and found the
goddess bedecked with flowers. The lovers retired without delay to the bed
chamber, anticipating joy; but when they sank down upon the cushions and
turned to each other, Hephaestus’ magic net closed around them and pinned
them where they lay, naked in each other’s embrace.
Hephaestus returned on cue and found the lovers lying there, and the sight was
as a sword in his heart. He cried out in his pain and bitter anger: “Father Zeus,
and all you gods! Come and see how Aphrodite despises me for my lameness
and incapacity, and takes as her lover Ares, just because he is a fine figure of a
god. But at least I have my revenge. I shall keep the two of them trapped there,
until Father Zeus has returned to me all the gifts I gave him as the bride-price of
Aphrodite. He owes me: it’s because of him that I’m lame and despised.”
While the goddesses stayed away out of modesty, all the gods ran up to see the
sight, and roared with laughter at the plight of the lovers. Seeing Aphrodite lying
naked there, they gazed lustfully on her, and bold Hermes declared that it would
be worth the netted humiliation to spend time in bed with the beautiful goddess
of love. But Poseidon begged Hephaestus to free them, and promised that he
would be paid all that he felt was his due. And so Hephaestus freed the lovers,
and Ares fled in shame to Thrace, while Aphrodite retired to her temple at
Paphos, where the Graces attended her and restored her wounded pride.

Hephaestus

Hephaestus is the god of fire, an outsider, unkempt and accustomed to mockery.
He works in his underground forges while the other gods are idle, as if he were
of another caste. Driven to the margins by his deformity and his work, he is the
blacksmith magician, encrusted with soot and dirt from his furnace, but creating
objects of extraordinary beauty and utility out of dull rock. Magicians must
always work on the margins, or lose their objectivity.
Many are the marvelous and intricate devices made by the hands of Hephaestus,
and all artisans, but especially metal-workers, honor him in their hearts. He is
attended in his workshop by the Cyclopes, the first forgers of Zeus’ thunderbolt,
but also by golden automata, made by Hephaestus himself. He made the gods’
homes, Zeus’ aegis with its hundred golden tassels, greaves for Heracles, and a
full set of armor for Achilles.
Hunched from birth, he disgusted his mother Hera, who flung him off high
Olympus into the depths of the moaning sea, and the twisting of his ankle as she
whirled the baby around lamed him forever. Thetis reared him in her cave on the
shores of Ocean, and he made for her jewelry of surpassing fineness. But he was
angry with his mother, and wanted to humiliate her as she had humiliated him.
He wrought for her a beautiful golden throne, of palpable majesty, and sent it to
her Olympian palace as a present, a token of peace between them. All unwitting,
Hera delighted in the ornate throne—but as soon as she sat in it, it held her fast
and rose high into the air.

The drunken Hephaestus returned to Olympus astride a mule, with his ally
Dionysus in attendance.[16]
The enraged goddess, the embarrassed queen of gods and men, sent Ares to
bring Hephaestus back to high Olympus and free her. Ares sped to Ocean on a
chariot of fire, but Hephaestus beat him off with his torches, shouting in his pain
and grief that he had no mother. But Dionysus was the friend of Hephaestus, and
he went to visit him in his volcanic forge, and plied him with cup after cup of the
finest wine, sufficient even for a god. The wine loosened Hephaestus’ limbs and
freed his caged anger. Dionysus escorted the drunken deity back to Olympus,
slumped astride a mule, and he agreed to release his mother, if his father would
grant him a favor.
Once the throne had been rendered harmless, Hephaestus begged the almighty
son of Cronus to allow him to make stern Athena his bed-partner. Zeus smiled in
pity and gave him permission to try, for Athena had sworn to remain inviolate.
Though lame and ugly, Hephaestus approached her with brash confidence, but
she spurned him, and he spilled his seed upon the ground. In later years, from the
impregnated soil arose Erichthonius, earth-born king of Athens.
But Hephaestus, having failed with Athena, asked instead, as his reward for
freeing cow-eyed Hera, that Aphrodite herself might become his wife; and great
Zeus the cloud-gatherer granted his wish, for she was surely not a sworn virgin.
But the marriage was neither of Aphrodite’s choosing nor to her taste.

Athena
Sing now, Muse, of keen-eyed Athena, whom Metis bore for Zeus. But when
Metis was close to her time, Zeus swallowed her, anxious lest a son be born
mightier than him, who would take his place and rule over gods and men. For
even the gods cannot always turn aside Fate.
But divine Athena was compelled to her birth, and in her great need sought a
channel out of her father. Every avenue she explored, until she came to his head.
In the extremity of his labor Zeus cried out for relief, and the halls of Olympus
trembled at the sound. Even in the din-filled depths of his forge, Hephaestus
heard the cries and hobbled as fast as he could to where Zeus sat on his throne,
holding his head with his hands. Without hesitation, he boldly raised his ax and
split open the head of Zeus, the mighty lord of gods and men, and out sprang
Athena, fully formed and fully clad in golden armor, her gray eyes flashing.

Athena, fully formed and fully clad in golden armor, her gray eyes flashing.
Lofty Olympus shuddered in fear at the power of the goddess, and the earth
shrieked. Waves billowed on the sea and then fell into a dead calm, and Helios
the sun-god stopped his chariot for a timeless moment in the sky, until new-born
Athena unstrapped her armor, and Fear slunk out of the room.
Her appearance is that of a fair and stately woman in the prime of life, but she
was born of her father, and her mind is wholly her father’s; her masculine mind
and her martial prowess keep her apart from the other goddesses. She has a rare
beauty, but it trumpets her untouchability, and no man or god dares to approach
her, for she has sworn to preserve her virginity. By accident, the Theban seer
Teiresias once saw her bathing, and she placed her hands over his eyes, blinding
him, though he had been woman as well as man.
Athena was the first teacher of all the household crafts that form the basis of
society. She made the first ship and wagon, the first plow and loom. Perfection
in craft is also hers, and so she is both the ever-near protector of the household
and the owl-eyed protector of cities; if they are threatened, she will surely
respond, and the snake that lies coiled at her feet will rise up hissing. She fights
not with passionate rage, like Ares, but with skill and prudence; he loves danger,
but she finds ways to make danger safe. She is the strategist, the leader of hosts,
and Ares carries out her will. Victory and glory she holds in her hands. And
Zeus honored his beloved daughter with the gift of his aegis, for it may be cast
as protection over a whole city. It is a mighty weapon, as well as a shield, for the
sound of the aegis, shaken over a battlefield, is so terrible that trembling seizes
the limbs of all who hear it.
There was a time when Arachne of Colophon won fame throughout Lydia for
her spinning and weaving, though she was of humble birth. Even the nymphs of
the mountains and winding rivers traveled far to see her handiwork, or just to see
her hands at work. And when they compared her to Athena, Arachne said: “Let
her compete with me if she wants.” Athena came to her in the guise of an old
woman and said: “You would do well to heed my advice, girl. Seek only to
surpass other mortals in your craft, but leave first place for the goddess. Pray for
forgiveness for your rash words.” But Arachne’s response was full of scorn.
“Woman, old age has stripped you of your wits!” she cried. “See how the
goddess refuses my challenge.” “No!” cried Athena, casting off her disguise.
“She is here!”
The two set about their embroidery. The theme of Athena’s work was her own
victory over Poseidon in the contest for patronage of Athens, and she

victory over Poseidon in the contest for patronage of Athens, and she
embellished the border with examples of the folly of mortals who challenge the
gods. But Arachne showed the gods as seducers and deceivers of mortal women,
and her work was perfect. Even Athena could find no fault with it, and in her
pride and anger the dread goddess forced the girl to suicide. But as the maiden
was gasping out her last breath in the stranglehold of the noose, Athena let her
live, but as a spider, so that she could hang and spin forever.

Apollo
All hail, blessed Leto, mother of the lord Apollo and the lady Artemis! When
you were pregnant and your time was due, you traveled the known world,
seeking a safe haven where you could give birth. But dread of Apollo gripped all
the lands, and only the humble island of Delos was willing to accept you—and
him. For the barren island had nothing to distinguish it, but as the center of the
worship of the golden youth it has attained wealth and eternal fame. And before
it was rootless, a wandering isle, but in gratitude you fixed it in place.
Sacred also to Apollo is Delphi, which lies at the center of the universe, for
Father Zeus released two eagles from the opposite ends of the earth and there
they met. When the lord Apollo came down from Olympus to find a site for his
oracle, he came to Crisa and slew the she-dragon under snow-capped Parnassus
and made the place his own. Crisa came to be known as Delphi, because Apollo,
in the form of a dolphin, brought Cretan sailors to land there to serve as the first
priests of his oracular sanctuary. Nowadays, young maidens serve as Apollo’s
Sibyls. But though Apollo speaks through the mouths of maidens elsewhere as
well, he declares the law most clearly from Delphi, and the heavens there are
filled with light that gleams on the precipices of the Shining Rocks and sparkles
on the crystal waters of the sacred spring. For he is the source of the light of law,
education, and civilization. The lyre is his, and his minstrels play sweet music
that soothes the savage breast; for poetry, as we bards know well, is the sister of
prophecy.
Rich in gold is Apollo, with golden lyre and golden bow, golden locks and
golden tunic. But he is vast, a god who is great enough to contain multitudes. He
is the far-shooter, for he must stand apart to do his work, and as well as the lyre,
he lays claim to the bow. Sweet music is his, but also the paean—Ie Paian—
sung in triumph or as a war-cry. He is the god who both spreads the miasma of
sickness and disperses it. He is gentle and violent, fair of face and dark of brow,
healer and destroyer. Praise the god in his greatness! May he grant us only good

and avert all evil in our days! Whoever knows Apollo is raised to greatness;
whoever does not know him is bound to be of lowly estate.
Now, Athena, stately goddess, invented the pipes to imitate the sweet, keening
sound of the dirge the Gorgons made to mourn Medusa’s death. She delighted in
the reedy tone, stepping lightly in time. But as she was playing the pipes one
day, she caught sight of her reflection in a pond, and hated the way she was
disfigured by the straps that bound the pipes to her face. Away she hurled the
loathed instrument, and it flew to Phrygia. There it was picked up by a Satyr,
Marsyas, who learned to play so sweetly that the clouds wept with sadness at the
plaintive melody.
In pride at his accomplishment, Marsyas challenged Apollo to a contest, pipes
against lyre. “So be it,” agreed golden-haired Apollo, “and let the winner do
whatever he likes with the loser!” Marsyas spent some time in contemplation,
listening to the source of sound, and when he played it was as if he had heard the
secret song of the world. Apollo himself, with his lyre, could do no better—but
he was a god, and tolerated no such insult as Marsyas’ challenge. He flayed all
the skin from Marsyas’ body, and the Satyr’s tears formed the river that still
bears his name.

The Satyr Marsyas was flayed alive for challenging Apollo to a music contest.[17]
Many are the tales that are told of Apollo. Ever fair and ever young, he has loved
and been loved by many a maiden and youth. He loved Daphne, fair nymph,
daughter of the river Peneus. His passion for her was as none before or since, for
he had sneered at the arrows of Eros, saying that his aim was more true; in
response the god of love simply loosed a single barb at the golden god. Even he,
the healer, had no cure for this sickness. But Daphne had sworn to remain a
virgin, and repulsed his advances. She was loved also by Leucippus, the son of
Oenomaus, who dressed as a woman to join her throng and be close to her. So
Apollo, in his jealousy, put it into Daphne’s head to bathe in the river. Poor
Leucippus! He desired to see her nudity, but not that she should see his. When
he refused to undress and swim with the other girls, his deceit was revealed, and
in their outrage Daphne and her friends pulled him into the river and drowned
him. But Apollo was not to be put off, and he pursued her as a hunter pursues a

hare, though she ran from him as a lamb flees a wolf. Away she sprinted, but the
god sped close on her heels. In desperation she prayed to her father for release
from her beauty, so that she should suffer wrong no more. Peneus had no quarrel
with Apollo, but he honored his daughter’s vow of chastity, and in an instant her
prayer was answered. Even as she was running her limbs stiffened and her toes
sought the darkness of the earth. There, in her place, stood a laurel tree. But
Apollo loved her still, and made the laurel his sacred tree. Even now the winners
at the Pythian games of Delphi receive no material reward but a garland of
berried laurel—and the blessing of the god.
Apollo also loved Cassandra, princess of Troy, and when she agreed to give
herself to him, he rewarded her with the gift of prophecy. But then she insulted
the god by changing her mind. Apollo asked her for one last kiss, and when she
turned her face up to him he spat a curse into her mouth. Ever thereafter she was
doomed to prophesy in vain, for no one believed a word she said and all took her
for a madwoman.
Apollo loved Hyacinthus of Sparta too, and it was their pleasure to anoint
themselves with olive oil and test each other’s athletic prowess. Once Apollo
took into his hands the weighty discus and hurled it true and far. Hyacinthus in
his joy ran after the discus, laughing, to pick it up and take his turn at the fair
sport. But the Spartan prince had spurned the advances of Zephyrus, the west
wind, and in his anger Zephyrus turned the discus back. It struck Hyacinthus full
in the face, and he died cradled in Apollo’s arms.
Two exalted sons were born to Apollo: the healer Asclepius, and the minstrel
Orpheus. Coronis was loved by Apollo, and was pregnant with their son
Asclepius; but the white raven, Apollo’s bird, saw her lying with another, and
told his master. Quick-tempered Apollo seized his bow and shot her dead. But he
could not bear that his son should die as well, and even as Coronis lay on the
pyre, the mighty god snatched his son out of the flames and his mother’s womb,
and brought him to the cave of the Centaur Cheiron, for him to raise the boy. But
he changed for evermore the raven’s color from white to black, a bitter reward
for the bearer of bitter tidings.

For telling Apollo of a lover’s infidelity, the once-white raven will forever be
black.[18]
Meanwhile, Asclepius grew up to bear his father’s gifts as a healer, and even to
surpass them, for the time came when the lady Artemis asked him to heal her
follower Hippolytus, the son of Theseus, though he was dead. Peerless Asclepius
exerted all his skill and at last the young man breathed again—but as a mortal
Asclepius had breathed his last, for Zeus blasted him with a thunderbolt for
violating the laws of nature. But Asclepius was taken into the heavens, and is the
patron god of medicine, beloved by many for his healing power.
Apollo, however, was furious at the killing of his son, and in revenge his swift
arrows soon found the hearts of the three Cyclopes, Hephaestus’ assistants,
makers of Zeus’ thunderbolt. But the will of Zeus is not to be scorned, and the
son of Cronus, the cloud-gatherer, was ready to hurl Apollo down to Tartarus, to
be imprisoned there forever. But kindly Leto intervened, and instead Apollo was
sentenced to serve for one year under Admetus, king of Thessalian Pherae.
Now, Admetus had but a short time to live, and Apollo took pity on his master
and begged the Fates to stay his death. The Fates agreed—provided that
someone could be found to take Admetus’ place. No one was willing, save only
loyal Alcestis, his wife, and Admetus accepted her sacrifice. But Heracles
wrestled Death himself for the life of fair Alcestis, and won, and restored her to
her husband.

her husband.
Orpheus, son of the far-shooter by the Muse Calliope, was such a gifted
musician that, as he sang and played on his lyre, the breezes stopped to listen in,
wild beasts followed tamely in his train, and the trees bent down their lofty
crowns to hear the sweet strains. Now, Orpheus loved the beautiful oak-nymph
Eurydice, and the charm of his music won her heart. But on the day of their
wedding, the very day, she was being pursued by Aristaeus, the lusty god of beekeeping and olive-growing. Deep into the woods she plunged to escape him,
where she was bitten by a snake and died.
The world has seen no grief like that of Orpheus. He dared to descend into the
underworld, and sang his request to grim Hades and his veiled wife Persephone.
At the sound of his song, Cerberus pricked up his ears, Tityus’ vultures raised
their gory beaks, Sisyphus sat on his boulder and listened.

Orpheus’ musical talent was unsurpassed among mortals, but even his songs
failed to overcome death.[19]
Entranced, the dark deities laid aside their habitual indifference and heard his
heartfelt plea, and allowed Eurydice to return from the dead. There was only one
condition: Orpheus was not to look back at her until they had left the halls of

condition: Orpheus was not to look back at her until they had left the halls of
Hades. Long, dark passages they traversed, and at last they were on the threshold
—and just then Orpheus glanced over his shoulder for his beloved, whose
footfall behind him he could no longer hear. Immediately, Eurydice lost
substance and fell back from whence she had come.
However much he pleaded, however long he lingered on the banks of the Styx,
foul river of the dead, gloomy Charon refused to ferry him across a second time.
Orpheus left the banks of Styx and wandered disconsolate in Thrace, choosing
wilderness to spare lives, for many would have died from sorrow on hearing his
songs of mourning. Only the birds of the air and beasts of the earth suffered the
shafts of his bitter strains. But Maenads too choose the wilderness when
Dionysus possesses them, and a band of them found him asleep and mistook him
for an enemy. They tore him to pieces, and his head and lyre, still lamenting,
floated down the Hebrus to the restless sea. But he and his beloved Eurydice
were never again separated.

Artemis
As Apollo stands apart, so too does his twin sister Artemis. She is the Mistress
of Animals, and her pleasure is in wild and remote places; and she is a chaste
virgin, disdainful, undefiled, and free. Men are not to her liking, and as a girl she
begged her father Zeus for chastity, and that she should be as great a deity as her
noble brother. And great Zeus granted her every desire.
She ranges with her attendant nymphs over shady hills and the windy heights of
virgin wilderness, unsullied by man. Pan gave her Arcadian hunting hounds, the
best of their kind, and she deals death with arrows crafted by the Cyclopes that
well fit her silver bow. She wears the horns of the cold, chaste moon on her
headdress. She is the overwhelming and fearsome presence within untamed
lands, where mortal men find how puny they are, and as she passes through the
moonlight the hills tremble and the valleys with them, and all beasts cry and
howl. She is the V of flying geese and the yellow glare of a lynx’s eye. She is the
All-Mother, the protector of all young creatures, and some she allows to live,
while the weaklings are culled. She abides on the margins, at change-over
points, especially when girls become women, and women become mothers.
The people of Thebes gave Leto great honor as the mother of the twin deities
Apollo and Artemis, but arrogant Niobe, wife of King Amphion, disagreed. As
the daughter of Tantalus and granddaughter of Atlas, she claimed that her
lineage was greater than that of Leto. She also bragged that, since she had borne

lineage was greater than that of Leto. She also bragged that, since she had borne
and raised a greater number of children, her life was more filled with blessings.
And she might indeed have been the happiest of mothers, if only she had not
boasted of it.
For the insult to their mother, Apollo and Artemis removed Niobe’s blessings:
Apollo shot down her six sons, while Artemis did the same with her six
daughters, except one called Chloris. The twanging of their bows mingled with
the screams of the dying, and the corpses remained unburied for nine days.
Niobe was turned to stone and carried away by a tornado to her native Lydia,
where her tears still trickle from the obdurate rock of Mount Sipylus.
Apollo and Artemis again avenged Leto’s honor when huge Tityus, the son of
Earth, tried to rape her as she was on her way one day to Delphi. The twin
deities hunted down the giant, and when they found him they riddled him with
their arrows. Down to Hades he lurched, where his body is spread out massively
over the ground, and on either side sits a vulture, feasting forever on his liver.
Actaeon of Thebes, learned in the lore of the forest, was relaxing at midday after
a morning of good hunting. He loved his aunt, Semele, but she was the beloved
of Zeus, and jealous anger swelled in the breast of the great god, father of gods
and men. He put it into the mind of Actaeon to take his rest, all unknowing, in a
grove favored by Artemis, where the goddess came to be bathed by her attendant
nymphs in a limpid pool of cool water, sheltered by a cave. No mortal man sees
Artemis naked and lives! While the nymphs screamed at the sight of a man and
tried to cover their mistress’s nakedness, she rose to her feet, majestic and
unafraid, and revealed all her glory to him in his last moments as a mortal man.
With a mere flick of her wrist, she splashed him lightly with water from the
pool, and before the last drops had rolled like tears down his cheeks, antlers were
already sprouting from his head. The stag dropped onto all fours and fled, while
Actaeon’s own hounds gave chase with slavering jaws. He tried to shout at them,
to calm them as he had in the past, but instead of their master’s voice, they heard
only the bellowing of a terrified stag. Soon they caught him and brought him
down, and the pack leader’s powerful jaws closed over his windpipe and gripped
tight, until the stag breathed no more.
With none to command them, the rest of the pack set to and tore him to pieces,
who had once been their beloved master. And Artemis, Mistress of Animals, was
pleased, for the purity of the goddess is not to be tainted, even by “accidents.”

pleased, for the purity of the goddess is not to be tainted, even by “accidents.”

“The stag dropped onto all fours and fled, while Actaeon’s own hounds gave
chase with slavering jaws.”[20]
Callisto spent her days and nights in the mountains of Arcadia, hunting and
living wild with Artemis and her nymphs. But she was very fair, and desire
flared in Zeus’ heart and loins. He came to her, taking on the appearance of
Artemis, as she rested alone one day in a dell. Too late did the maiden discover
his trick when he forced his embraces on her. She fought back, but no mortal or
god can resist the power of Zeus. The weeks and months rolled by, and the time
came when Artemis called on all her followers to bathe with her, for there was
no man to see them. Callisto blushed and hesitated, but she had no choice, and
her nakedness made her pregnancy plain for all to see. Artemis in anger turned
the maiden into a bear and banished her from her entourage; and the bear gave
birth to a son, Arcas, who was raised by Maia, the mother of Hermes. But later
Callisto wandered into a forbidden sanctuary of Zeus, and was about to be killed
by Arcas himself, for he had become a masterful hunter; but Zeus took pity on

by Arcas himself, for he had become a masterful hunter; but Zeus took pity on
his former lover and translated her into the heavens as the Great Bear
constellation.
Orion was a mighty hunter, the son of Poseidon, and lover of Eos, the dawn
light. So vast and fleet of foot was he that he could cross valleys at a bound and
his father endowed him with the ability to walk on water. But once, drunk on
Chios—for the island produces the best of wines—he raped the king’s daughter,
and for this sin he was blinded. He took a young boy onto his shoulders, and
commanded him to lead him eastward; and as the sun rose, Eos shone her light
straight into her lover’s eyes and cured him, and he returned to Crete, where he
was awarded the unique honor of hunting in the company of Artemis and Leto.
So successful was he at clearing the earth of the ferocious beasts that preyed on
men’s flocks and livelihoods, that he fell to boasting. “There’s no creature,” he
cried, “that I could not bring down with my strong spear or my swift arrows!”
Zeus’ brow darkened at this foolish boast, and in anger he sent against Orion a
giant scorpion. The contest was over as quick as the flick of the monster’s tail.
Zeus raised the victor to the heavens, and, at Artemis’ request, did the same for
Orion; and in the heavens the scorpion chases Orion forever. Orion, however,
chases the Pleiades, the seven daughters of Atlas after whom he had lusted in
life. For seven years he had pursued them, until Zeus in his mercy made them
stars.

Hermes
Many tales are told too of crafty Hermes, son of Zeus by the nymph Maia. From
the moment he came into being, his restless nature was plain. It is said that, on
the very day of his birth, he found and killed a tortoise, scooped out the soft
flesh, and strung the hollow shell to make the first lyre. Then, that same night, he
stole the cattle of the archer-god Apollo. To mislead any who should give chase,
he drove the cattle backward, while walking backward himself and disguising
his barefoot baby prints with oversized sandals, strapped to his feet like snowshoes.
Having corralled the cattle, he invented the fire-stick, and used it to light a
cooking fire on which he roasted two whole cows, and ate them. Then he
returned to the cave of his birth and clambered into his cot, cooing innocently.
But Apollo guessed who the culprit was and threatened to toss the baby down
into Tartarus. At first Hermes lied—“I’m just a baby! How could I have stolen
any cattle?”—but then he confessed, and to be reconciled with Apollo gave him

any cattle?”—but then he confessed, and to be reconciled with Apollo gave him
the lyre. Apollo took the instrument as his own, and in return made for Hermes
the three-pronged caduceus wand, the living, golden staff that will be his symbol
and sign forever.

On the day he was born, crafty Hermes invented the lyre and rustled Apollo’s
cattle.[21]
Hermes is the god of the sudden and unexpected, the elusive and edgy. He
governs thievery, trade and bargaining, messages and mischief, invention and
inspiration. He is the trickster and the eternal adolescent, for he comes when
least expected, and not always when called. He is the restless god of magic and
of luck, his countenance never still. He is the god of borders and crossings; the
guardian of flocks, which stray without his guidance; and the wayfinder, into
whose hands travelers commend themselves. He appears out of the blue,
bringing good fortune or a message from the gods, perhaps in the form of a lucid
dream; or he snatches a dying man and guides him to the underworld. For the
journey between life and death takes but an instant. When a sudden silence falls
or joy thrills a heart, there is Hermes; unanticipated opportunities for love or
fortune are his gifts.
Some say that Hermes fathered Pan, goat-footed deity of the mountains and

valleys, of the remotest crags and peaks and meadows, and the sweet sounds of
his reed pipes echo in the canyons in the late afternoon as the shepherds call
their flocks. Pan invented the pipes when he lost the nymph he was chasing and
turned his attention instead to the reeds where she had hidden. Another musical
maiden he loved was Echo, who could imitate any sound in the world. When she
spurned him, he drove some shepherds insane, and they tore the fair nymph to
pieces; but Earth buried each scattered piece of her, and still the secret places
where her parts are buried return the sounds of others. Pan is the god of
shepherds and the hunter of small animals, of the kind that keep men alive
during their months of vigil, watching over their flocks in the hills and
mountains. But he is also the bringer of panic, when flocks—or men in battle—
for no reason stampede and turn to frantic flight. And he was called Pan, “All,”
for he was pleasing to all the gods, but especially to Dionysus.

Dionysus
Sweet Muse, tell at last of twice-born Dionysus. His mother was Semele,
daughter of Cadmus, whom Zeus loved. But when Hera found out, in her
jealousy she plotted her rival’s death. She appeared to Semele in the guise of her
aged nurse and persuaded her that, as the bedmate of the Ruler of All, she should
be the equal of Hera—that Zeus should appear to her as a god, not as a mortal
man. And Semele listened to the goddess’s honeyed lies, for she wanted to know
the greater pleasure of lying with a god not in human form.
When Zeus next came to her in his earthly disguise, she teased her lover and
made him promise to do whatever she asked. Her request, of course, was for him
to reveal himself. The great god hesitated, for he knew what would happen. But
he had given his word and came blazing to her bed. As Hera had planned,
Semele was consumed by the brilliance of Zeus’ majesty, but the cloud-gatherer
took up his unborn son from her lifeless womb and sewed him up in his thigh,
from where he was born again when his time came. Later on, Dionysus went
down to Hades to recover his mother, and she dwells now forever with the
blessed gods on Olympus.
Dionysus is the god of viticulture and wine, a joy for mortal men, and hence of
ecstasy and liberation from the conventions of society. He is the sap of life, the
blood throbbing in the veins, the sweet burst of the grape in the mouth. He is the
god of the theater, for men permit themselves to release their emotions, for better
or for worse, when absorbed in the marvelous productions of playwrights.
Dionysus is known as Bromius, the rebel, and his robe is as gorgeous as any

Dionysus is known as Bromius, the rebel, and his robe is as gorgeous as any
girl’s.
His gift is freedom, and so little regard has he for what men call “law” and
“custom” that his followers, the raving Maenad women, are said to tear apart
wild animals and eat them raw, when they are possessed by the god and
endowed with superhuman strength. They drink his blood as wine, and eat his
flesh. For the other gods keep their distance, but Dionysus possesses his
followers completely and is wholly possessed in return. Clad in fawnskins and
clutching the sacred thyrsus staff, entwined with ivy and topped with a pine
cone, they revel with wild abandon in the countryside to the sound of the pipes
and the cymbal, grasping poisonous snakes with immunity and petting tame
panthers. Meanwhile, the horse-eared Sileni and goat-bearded Satyrs who attend
the god go about their lusty business.
Many a tale is told of the fate suffered by those who resist the entry of his
shocking and unconventional religion. When Lycurgus of Thrace drove his
followers off the mountain, great Zeus, the father of Dionysus, blinded the man
for his blindness. And when all the women of Thebes thronged to the hills and
forests to worship the god, King Pentheus persecuted them, and for his pains was
killed by his own mother and sisters. The fool spied on their worship and was
discovered, but the women failed to recognize him in their god-induced frenzy.
They tore him limb from limb as easily as they would a rabbit, relishing their
gruesome task as a sign of their devotion to the god.
And in Boeotian Orchomenus the daughters of Minyas refused to acknowledge
the god’s divinity and join the other women in the countryside. They preferred to
stay indoors, as they believed good women should, and get on with their
weaving. Dionysus appeared to them as a girl to warn them of their folly, for the
god is not without pity, but they ignored him. He drove them mad, and one of
them tore her own baby to bits.
In the course of his missionary travels, spreading the word of his religion,
Dionysus came to Athens. There he taught King Pandion the art of nurturing the
vine and turning its fruit into blessed wine, but some drunken peasants, not
appreciating the divine gift of the god, thought their king had poisoned them.
They killed Pandion and hid his body. His daughter Erigone, led to the woodland
grave by her father’s faithful dog, hanged herself in grief from a sturdy branch.
But Dionysus always retaliates. He drove the women of Athens mad, and forever
after they propitiate the god by hanging little fetishes of Erigone in trees and
setting them to swing.

setting them to swing.
Once, as a youth, Dionysus was captured by pirates as he walked on the shore,
and they were pleased, for they thought him the son of a king and worth a fine
ransom. They bound him with strong rope, but the ropes fell in worthless coils to
the deck of the ship. When the pirates remained heedless of this warning, further
signs appeared: the ship’s hull flowed with sweet wine; vines and ivy, thick with
fruit and blooming flowers, entwined the mast and the sails; and phantom
shapes, as of tigers and panthers, prowled the deck. Then the god became a lion
and devoured the ship’s captain, while the rest of the sailors leapt into the sea
and were turned into dolphins. Only the helmsman survived, for he had
recognized the god’s divinity, and carried him safely over the waters to his holy
haven, the lush island of Naxos.
*
On high Olympus, the gods are attended at their golden feasts by Hebe, daughter
of Zeus and Hera, for she is the ideal of young nubile womanhood, loyal to her
elder kin and dedicated to their service. But Zeus’ special cup-bearer is
Ganymede, once the mortal prince of Troy, so fair of face and form that Zeus
could not resist his charms and had him carried up to Olympus by a whirlwind,
though some say Zeus bore him off himself, in the form of an eagle. The lad’s
father Tros was grieved, for he did not know where his son had gone; but Zeus
sent Hermes to give him the glad tidings that Ganymede was held high in Zeus’
honor and would remain youthful forever.

Fair Prince Ganymede of Troy was carried off by Zeus to serve him on Olympus.
[22]

As further recompense for his loss, Zeus gave Tros immortal horses, the pick of
his shining herds. And so fair Ganymede stands devotedly by the throne of Zeus,
ready with the golden cup of sweet nectar. And Hebe modestly supervises the
feasting and assures that all appetites are satisfied at the banquet table of the
gods.
These are the gods and goddesses who dwell forever in bliss in the halls of high
Olympus. The tales that are told about them imbue them with traits like our own,
as though they were simply many times more powerful and wise than mortal
men and women. Yet one unbridgeable chasm is set between them and creatures

men and women. Yet one unbridgeable chasm is set between them and creatures
of mere flesh and bone: the gods cannot die! They are eternal and carefree, while
men soon wither and die like leaves from a tree, and their lives are filled with
toil and sorrow. The gods are, then, finally incomprehensible to mortal minds,
just as a monkey cannot understand a man, and that is why we speak of them in
parables. The storyteller’s job is to shed light, no more.

Chapter Four
THE AGE OF HEROES
The Flood
There have been several ages of man, or at least of creatures that we might
recognize as human. But in between each age, a cosmic catastrophe more or less
destroys the human race, and leaves little memory of the preceding age, and little
continuity between them. Such is the history of man: progress cut short by
catastrophe. So will it always be, until men learn to worship the gods and the
earth aright.
First, in the era of Cronus, came the race of golden men, each sprung fully
mature from the earth. They had no need to work, or even to cook, for Earth put
forth all her bounty freely, and it was theirs for the taking. Nor did they fall ill or
grow old: they remained in their prime, and just died one day gently in their
sleep, returning to the earth from which they had been born. Of these men and
their life of leisured ease no trace remains, unless any of them remain as kindly
ghosts upon the earth. It’s hard to say even if they were like us in form, whether
we would recognize them as human beings, since they were born from the earth,
not of human mothers; for there were as yet no women. They preceded the
formation of all animals by Zeus and the Olympian gods, and they came long
before Prometheus’ gift of fire, by which we measure the foundation of the
human species. For the earth was still very young.
But the next two races of men—the silver and the bronze, the first two races that
benefited from Prometheus’ gift of fire—proved unsatisfactory. The men of
silver were fair but witless; immature and irresponsible until they were a
hundred years old, they then promptly died. And while they lived, like children,
they abused one another and failed to recognize the gods. In due course of time
Zeus did away with this race, but the bronze one that followed was little better.
They were hulking men, with huge bodies; many had thick hides of bronze.
They had limited intelligence, and delighted only in war, until they wiped one
another off the face of the earth, and now they dwell forever in Hades.
Zeus sent a flood to finish off these brutes, but Prometheus ensured that the
human race would continue. His son Deucalion and Epimetheus’ daughter
Pyrrha repopulated the earth, and thereby became the ancestors of the next race,
the race of heroes. Many of them too perished untimely in war or other ventures,

the race of heroes. Many of them too perished untimely in war or other ventures,
but the earth thrived for a while, and there are many tales of the heroes to be
told. Humankind had at last fulfilled the potential bestowed on it by Prometheus.
But now, by a simple process of degeneration, we live in the Age of Iron, when
human life is nothing but toil and suffering and early death. That’s all the Age of
Iron has to offer. The gods no longer linger with mortal men on earth, as they did
in the time of the heroes, but have removed themselves in carefree abandonment
of the human race. Truly the poet sang: “Best not to have been born at all, or else
to die as early as possible.”
Let one story of the hateful men of bronze suffice for them all. Lycaon, king of
Arcadia, had many sons, and they were notorious for their subhuman savagery.
By then Zeus had in any case endured enough of the depredations of their kind,
and he visited Lycaon and his sons in the guise of a poor pilgrim, to see for
himself how wicked they were. At the king’s banquet table, they served him the
flesh and intestines of a recently slaughtered child. Zeus in disgust pushed the
dish away and departed at once. He was now determined to eliminate the race of
bronze; they had no redeeming features. He saw that the heart of that race was a
pit writhing with serpents and maggots, and that if they were ever good it was
only out of fear of him. So he gave them reason to fear him.
First, he locked up all the warring winds in a cave, so that they might not scatter
the clouds, save only the wet south wind, whose beard and misty-white locks
dripped with rain, and storm clouds hovered on his brow. The rain that fell
smelled of promise and decay, but it was heavy enough to flatten crops within a
few hours, and then flood the fields. Zeus called upon his brother Poseidon to
help, and the earth-shaker commanded all the rivers to overflow their banks. The
flood waters tore down trees, bore away cattle and men, houses and wagons.
Streams became torrents, torrents became mighty rivers, rivers became lakes.
Before long, even the tallest towers had vanished beneath the surging waves, and
the whole surface of the earth was sea. Fish swam among the branches of trees,
and turtles paddled where goats had grazed. Many of those who survived
drowning later succumbed to starvation, since there was little food to be found
anywhere.
But Deucalion was a rarity, a righteous man in the Age of Bronze, taught well by
his father Prometheus. The Titan warned him of the impending deluge, and
Deucalion built an ark, no more than an oversized chest, and stocked it with
provisions for himself and his wife. The curious vessel bobbed along, at the
mercy of the wind and the waves, and on the tenth day it struck one of the two

mercy of the wind and the waves, and on the tenth day it struck one of the two
peaks of Mount Parnassus, which were now lone islets in the endless expanse of
sea. There Deucalion found a sanctuary of Themis, and he and Pyrrha prayed in
tears for the restoration of the human race. And the goddess taught him, saying:
“You and your wife are to veil your heads, and as you walk from my sanctuary,
throw behind you the bones of your mother.”
The two of them, husband and wife, deliberated for a while about what the
goddess might mean. Then they left the sanctuary, tossing over their shoulders
behind them stones, the bones of the all-mother Earth. And immediately, as each
stone landed on the earth with a thump, it softened and took shape. Those that
Deucalion threw sprang up from the mountaintop as men, and those that Pyrrha
tossed were women. All other creatures emerged from the warm mud as the
waters receded. So all the men of the next era, the Age of Heroes, descend from
Deucalion or some other fortunate survivor. For there were a few, but only a
few. The will of Zeus was carried out.

“Those stones that Deucalion threw sprang up from the mountaintop as men,
and those that Pyrrha tossed were women.”[23]

The Line of Deucalion
Deucalion and Pyrrha also had a son Hellen, from whom all the Greeks, the
Hellenes, are descended. In their blood are mingled the spirits of both
Prometheus and Epimetheus. The sons of Hellen were Dorus, Aeolus, and
Xuthus, whose sons were Ion and Achaeus. And so the tribes of the Greeks are

Xuthus, whose sons were Ion and Achaeus. And so the tribes of the Greeks are
the Dorians, the Aeolians, the Ionians, and the Achaeans.
Aeolus had many sons and daughters, who became in their turn the forebears of
heroes. Some tales are told of his sons. Salmoneus got ideas above his station,
and began to style himself Zeus. He rode around in a chariot that had been
equipped, farcically, with bronze jars and pine torches, to imitate Zeus’ thunder
and lightning. Zeus hurled him down into Tartarus, to suffer eternal torment, and
he annihilated his followers, for many had obeyed the mad king’s injunctions to
bow down and worship him. Only his daughter Tyro was spared, for she had
fallen out with her father over his delusions. Poseidon lay with her in the curl of
a wave, and she became the mother of Pelias and Neleus, while to her husband
Cretheus she bore Aeson, Pheres, and Amythaon—heroes all, but their children
were even mightier.
Poseidon slept too with Aeolus’ daughter Canace, and one of their sons was
Aloeus, whose wife Iphimedea was also loved by Poseidon. Two strapping sons
she bore him, Otus and Ephialtes, but they shared the arrogance of Salmoneus
and resolved to overthrow the reign of Zeus and the Olympian gods. By the age
of nine, the boys were nine fathoms tall and nine cubits wide. They feared only
Ares, god of war, but through treachery they bound him in fetters and
imprisoned him in an inescapable jar of bronze. Through treachery also the
whereabouts of Ares was revealed to Hermes by the giants’ stepmother, and he
released his brother, the god of war. When Otus and Ephialtes began their
assault on heaven, by piling up mountains—Ossa on lofty Olympus, and Pelion
on Ossa, a monstrous ladder by which to ascend to the heavens—they were
summarily destroyed by the war god, cast down in a tangle of bloodied and
broken limbs. For the new breed of men, the descendants of Deucalion, had
almost as deep and wide a vein of hubris in their souls as their brazen
predecessors.
The famous Sisyphus was another son of Aeolus, but his fame rests on the
torment devised for him. It was said that, despite being married to Merope, one
of the seven daughters of Atlas, he secretly visited Anticlea, the wife of Laertes,
and that she conceived Odysseus from the union, but concealed the fact and
passed the baby off as Laertes’. But Sisyphus’ crime was this. Zeus was in love
with Aegina, daughter of the river Asopus, and abducted her to the island that
would bear her name, keeping her there as his concubine. Asopus searched
everywhere for his daughter, but could find her nowhere. It was Sisyphus who
told him the truth, and for this Zeus sent Death to him.

told him the truth, and for this Zeus sent Death to him.
But Sisyphus wrestled with Death and bound him fast; and the natural order of
things ceased, for no one now could die. But dark-browed Ares released Death
from his fetters and handed Sisyphus over to him.
The son of Aeolus made one last attempt to cheat death: he forbade his wife to
perform the customary funeral rites, so that Charon could not let him cross the
river Styx and join the rest of the dead in the underworld. But Sisyphus had no
more tricks to play, and eventually he died in earnest. Suspecting that he would
try to escape again, Hades devised for Sisyphus a terrible punishment.
Unceasingly, he is compelled to roll a heavy boulder up a hill; when he reaches
the top, the boulder rolls back down again to the bottom, and Sisyphus has to
begin again. Thus men should know not to anger the gods.

Sisyphus toils endlessly in Hades for trying to cheat Death and the will of Zeus.
[24]

The Argonauts and the Golden Fleece
Athamas, son of Aeolus and king of Boeotia, took as his wife Nephele, the
cloud, and she bore him two fine children, a boy and a girl, Phrixus and Helle.
But Nephele returned to the sky, and Athamas took as his second wife Cadmus’
daughter Ino, who had nursed Dionysus. Ino hated her stepchildren, and
determined to do away with them. Her opportunity came when throughout
Boeotia the crops failed. The failure itself was Ino’s doing: she had persuaded all
the women to spoil the seed in their husband’s stores, so that it wouldn’t sprout.
Athamas sent to Apollo at Delphi to ask what he had to do to stop the famine,
but the envoys too were Ino’s men, and they returned saying that, according to
Apollo, the only remedy was to sacrifice Phrixus. The boy nobly agreed to his
own death, if it would bring life to others, and Athamas, tears streaking his
cheeks, was just about to comply with the god’s terrible command, when
Nephele snatched up her children and took them into the sky. When Athamas
learned the truth, Ino hurled herself and her son off a cliff, but Dionysus made
sure that his old wet-nurse did not die, and transformed her at the moment of her
death into the sea-nymph Leucothea.
Meanwhile, Nephele placed the children on a golden-fleeced ram, the offspring
of Poseidon when he had mated as a ram with Theophane in the guise of a ewe.
Away sped the magical ram eastward through the sky, but, as he passed the
narrow strip of water that divides Europe from Asia, sweet Helle lost her grip
and fell into the sea. Hence the strait is known as the Hellespont, the Sea of
Helle, in memory of the wretched girl. But her brother flew on, knowing why
both tears and the sea are salty.

A magical ram with a golden fleece flew young Phrixus to far Colchis.[25]
On and on, over the south coast of the Black Sea he flew, until he came to
Colchis, where King Aeëtes, son of the sun, made him welcome. In thanksgiving
for his deliverance, Phrixus sacrificed the fantastic ram to Zeus, and gave the
fleece to Aeëtes, who hung it on an oak tree in a grove sacred to Ares, and set as
its guard a fearsome serpent, whose eyes never closed in rest. But Aeëtes had
been warned against strangers bearing, or bearing off, a golden fleece, as a sign
that his reign would come to an end, and he killed Phrixus to avoid this destiny,
not knowing that he was not the stranger to whom the oracle alluded.
So might matters have rested forever, were it not for the villainy of Pelias, son of
Tyro, in distant Greece. At the death of Cretheus, brother of Athamas, he
usurped the throne of Iolcus from its rightful king, his own brother, Aeson. In
fear, Aeson smuggled his son Jason out of the city, and sent him to the hills, to

fear, Aeson smuggled his son Jason out of the city, and sent him to the hills, to
be brought up by the Centaur Cheiron. But Pelias was afraid of Jason, for he
knew of an oracle that foretold his death at the hands of a descendant of Aeolus.
Even though Aeolus had many descendants, the field was narrowed down by an
oracle that was more precise, if somewhat bizarre: “Beware of a man with one
sandal!”
*
When Jason came of age, he returned to Iolcus. On the way he came to a river
whose water was swollen by rain. An old woman stood helpless beside the
raging torrent, and Jason took pity on her and offered to carry her across.
Unknown to Jason, the old woman was Hera in disguise, and henceforth he
found favor in her eyes. But the current was strong and his burden not so light;
the mud of the stream-bed sucked off one of his sandals, and the turbulent water
carried it away downstream.
Jason limped into the palace of Iolcus, wearing his single sandal, and Pelias was
terrified. Jason demanded the throne of Iolcus as his birthright, now that he was
a fully grown man, and Pelias agreed, on one condition: that Jason was to bring
back the golden fleece from Colchis. Pelias saw this as a chance to get rid of the
young pretender once and for all, but Jason, mighty hero and confident youth,
saw a quest worthy of his mettle, and agreed to undertake the task.
But how to reach Colchis, which lay at the edge of the known world? No one
had yet invented a vessel that was capable of such a long voyage. Jason called on
the goddess of craft, the lady Athena, and begged her to solve the problem. The
quick-witted goddess thought for a while and her thoughts readily acquired
shape. She infused her knowledge into the mind of the artisan Argus, and the
ship he constructed was called the Argo, whose name means “swift.” But the
goddess herself fashioned the prow from the living oak of Zeus’ oracle at
Dodona, and endowed it with the power of speech.
The journey would be long and dangerous, plying unknown waters past
unknown lands filled, most likely, with lawless monsters. It was exactly the
quest that the heroes of Greece had been waiting for, and Hera urged their hearts
to respond eagerly to Jason’s call for crew to man the sleek vessel and share the
hazardous journey. Before long, Jason had a full complement of fifty men, all of
them fine warriors and sage counselors, surpassing all others in their skills.

Heracles was there, and Idas, his rival in size and strength, who once fought
Apollo himself for the right to bed fair Marpessa; and Meleager and Menoetius,
bold hunters and men of war. So was Peleus of Aegina and his comrade
Telamon of Salamis, who matched oars on either side of the bow. The
soothsayers Idmon and Mopsus accompanied the Argonauts, as did Euphemus,
son of Poseidon, who could run so swiftly over the surface of the waves that his
feet remained dry. Neither Castor the horseman nor his twin brother Polydeuces
the boxer could resist the challenge, and the shape-changer Periclymenus too
made his special skill available to Jason. Tiphys was the helmsman, while farseeing Lynceus took the prow, and Orpheus himself carried the beat for the
oarsmen.

The Argonauts set out on the first high-seas quest—to find the Golden Fleece.[26]
After leaving the Greek mainland, their first adventure took place on the island
of Lemnos, inhabited only by women and ruled by Queen Hypsipyle. The
Lemnian women had neglected the worship of Aphrodite, and in punishment the
goddess had made them emit a smell that repulsed their husbands and drove
them into the arms of their slaves. All Greek men assume the right to sleep with

them into the arms of their slaves. All Greek men assume the right to sleep with
their female slaves, but the Lemnians ignored their legitimate families, and set
up new homes. In retaliation, the women killed or banished all their menfolk. By
the time the Argonauts got there, the women had not known men for some time.
They refused to let the Argonauts land until they had promised to tarry with
them. The heroes stayed a full year, before Heracles tore them from their life of
ease and they continued on their way; and many fine sons and daughters were
born on the island of Lemnos.
They stopped next at the Cyzicus peninsula, where they helped the king defeat
some earth-born giants who were terrorizing his people, the Doliones. After
celebrating their victory with a feast, the Argonauts cast off, but adverse winds
drove them back to Cyzicus in the night. Their new friends mistook them for
enemies in the darkness and driving rain, and a fight took place in which Jason
himself killed the king, and many other Doliones died. In the morning, the king’s
daughter hanged herself in grief, and the heroes were prevented from leaving by
storms, until Mopsus used his powers to divine the will of the gods, and told
them they must sacrifice to Rhea. Only she, ancient goddess, could heal the
terrible wounds.
They were still far from their destination when they lost Heracles. He was so
strong that he had broken an oar, just by pulling on it, and the voyagers made
land at Cius where he could find timber for a replacement. But while he was
ashore, cutting and shaping the trunk, his beloved Hylas disembarked to draw
water. Far he wandered into the forest, until he came to a pool of crystal water.
But when he knelt down at the water’s edge and looked into the pool, he saw no
reflection of his face. Closer and closer he leaned down—and then, in the depths,
he glimpsed a bevy of the most beguiling and beautiful girls he had ever seen.
He was never seen again; the water nymphs had made him theirs. But Heracles
spent so long searching for his lost boy that the rest of the heroes carried on
without him, and still the hills and forests around Cius echo the name of Hylas,
as if from the lingering cries of Heracles.
In Bithynia they stopped to consult blind Phineus, the most famous soothsayer in
the world. Because he was such an outstanding seer, and knew too much of the
gods’ minds, Zeus himself had blinded the old man and set the Snatchers on him,
black-winged monsters with the faces of hags, swift as the storm wind. In return
for his advice Phineus charged the heroes with driving off the horrid monsters.
For every time he sat at table, they swooped down and stole the food from under

his nose, or befouled it, and the man was wasting away. The Argonauts
succeeded in chasing away the Snatchers, and in gratitude Phineus gave them
good advice about how to win their way through the hazards that still awaited
them. Above all, he told them how to escape the Clashing Rocks at the entrance
to the Black Sea, which came together faster than the wind and crushed all
shipping. Even dolphins were sometimes caught in the granite jaws. Phineus told
them to release a dove to fly between the rocks, so that they could time their own
passage. They did as he suggested, following the dove, and the bird lost its tailfeathers to the rocks, but the surge of the waves rebounding from the looming
cliffs prevented the passage of the Argo.
Now the rocks were closing in on the heroes again. They could see the grain of
the stone and the spray dripping from the menacing face of the dark cliff. But
Hera herself, Jason’s protectress, held apart the jagged precipices while they
scraped through, as the rocks crashed together for the last time, taking only the
tail end of the stern.
After further adventures, the heroes reached their destination, Colchis. Aeëtes
superficially made them welcome, but secretly recognized in Jason the stranger
foretold by the oracle, the one who would bring his reign to an end. Jason
politely asked him for the fleece, and explained the circumstances of the quest he
had been set by Pelias, but Aeëtes saw this only as a way to engineer Jason’s
death. He promised him the fleece if he succeeded in carrying out two tasks. But
the tasks were meant to be impossible: even if Jason somehow managed to
survive the first one, the second would surely kill him; and once Jason was dead,
Aeëtes planned to do away with the rest of the Argonauts.
It was a good plan. What Aeëtes didn’t know, however, was that his daughter
Medea had fallen head over heels in love with Jason. Hera and Aphrodite
between them had slyly seen to that, by supplying Jason with a potent
lovecharm. Jason surreptitiously gave the charm to Medea as one of the guestgifts he had brought for her and her father. The young woman couldn’t
understand it: she had hardly met him and yet she knew she did not want to see
this quietly confident stranger die. There was something about him … Medea
was a useful ally: she was a priestess of Hecate, skilled in sorcery and charms
known only to the wicked and the wise.
Jason’s first task was to sow a field with dragon’s teeth. It sounded easy enough
—but the field had to be plowed by a team of fire-breathing oxen with lethal
bronze hoofs and aggression to match. But Medea made Jason a salve which

bronze hoofs and aggression to match. But Medea made Jason a salve which
would temporarily protect him from fire and metal. Jason boldly disrobed and
smeared his body; naked and gleaming, he approached the oxen unscathed.
Staring them in the eyes, he bowed them to his will. They submitted to the
sturdy yoke, and he plowed the field, scattering the dragon’s teeth from his
helmet.
But no one—except cunning Aeëtes—expected what happened next. No sooner
had the dragon’s teeth been sown than fully armed warriors sprang from the soil
and formed up to attack Jason. Medea, looking on, was terrified: she hadn’t
anticipated this and had no potion prepared that would save her beloved from the
warriors’ spears. But Jason was equal to the task. Thinking quickly (and, if he
did but know it, imitating Cadmus), he picked up a boulder and tossed it into the
hostile throng. Supposing they were under attack from their own midst, the
warriors fell to fighting among themselves, and the slaughter continued until
none remained.
So Jason had survived his first test. The second was simply to take the fleece—
but in order to do so he first had to get past the sentinel and into the thicket
where the fleece was hanging. Medea brewed a drug and gave it to Jason. “This
will put the creature to sleep,” she said, “but he has to take it in deeply. You will
have to let it swallow you.”

“Medea was a priestess of Hecate, skilled in sorcery and charms known only to
the wicked and the wise.”[27]
Jason steeled his nerves and did exactly as she had told him. Clutching the phial
of potion, he approached the monster—it was larger than a warship, and
venomous spume dripped from its mouth—and let it swallow him whole. As
soon as the drug began to take effect, the dragon vomited Jason up from the
disgusting depths of its stomach. Then it lay down beneath the tree that held the
fleece, and fell fast asleep. Once he had recovered his composure and rinsed the
vile stench from his limbs, Jason took the wonderful fleece down from the tree
where it was hanging, and ran straight for the Argo, with willing Medea holding
tightly onto his hand. All his men were waiting there, for the soothsayer Idmon

had guessed Aeëtes’ designs and warned Jason that they must make a swift
departure.
Aeëtes speedily set sail in pursuit. But Medea had taken her little brother
Aspyrtus with her as well and she devised a terrible way to delay her father. As
they were sailing from Colchis down the Phasis river to the sea, she killed
Aspyrtus, chopped his corpse into pieces, and threw it limb by limb over the side
of the ship. It took Aeëtes a long time to retrieve enough of the body to ensure
that the boy could be given a proper funeral, a father’s first priority. So the
Argonauts made their escape.
Their route back to Thessaly, to claim the throne of Iolcus from Pelias, was
tortuous. Storm winds and adverse deities often drove them from their path, even
to the waters of Ocean. On Crete, they encountered Talos, the tireless guardian
of the island, capable of striding around it three times in a single day. A survivor
from the Age of Bronze, he was invincible—except that there was a patch of
ordinary skin on his ankle, unprotected by bronze. Medea brought all her powers
to bear, and uttered curses and charms that caused the monster to slip and graze
his ankle on a sharp rock as he was seeking boulders to hurl at the Argonauts.
“Keep away! Keep away!” he shouted. But then, like a tall tree that has been
hewn in the forest, Talos swayed on his feet. Looking down, he saw the ichor
flowing out of his wound like molten lead, and crashed lifeless to the ground,
shaking the entire island and causing a freak wave that threatened to swamp the
Argo.
The eastern slopes of Pelion loomed ever larger as the Argo sped toward her
destination. Jason knew that, despite his recovery of the fleece, Pelias had no
intention of handing the throne over to him when he returned. His uncle had
already killed Jason’s remaining close kin, and the hero understood that only one
of them would survive this clash. He confided his concerns to Medea, and she
hatched a plan to get rid of Pelias for good.
When they got close to Iolcus, they beached the ship out of sight, and Medea
went on ahead, disguised as a priestess of Artemis. Before long, she had
befriended Pelias’ daughters, and had found out that their greatest desire was for
their elderly father to be young again. They were enjoying their royal luxury,
and didn’t want to see it come to an end soon. Medea told them that she knew
just what to do.
For nine days and nine nights she searched high and low on her dragon-drawn

For nine days and nine nights she searched high and low on her dragon-drawn
chariot for the herbs she needed, and plucked them without metal in moonlight
to preserve their powers. Then, to convince the gullible girls that she knew what
she was doing, she demonstrated her skill on an aged ram. Wide-eyed with
horror, Pelias’ daughters looked on as she slit the ram’s throat, drained it of
blood, and then put the body in a cauldron of elixir made from her special herbs
and roots. Three times she circled the cauldron righthandwise, and three times
lefthandwise. After a while, the girls were astonished to hear a gentle bleating
from inside the cauldron—and Medea pulled out a lamb!
Certain of Medea’s skill, the very next day the girls persuaded Pelias to
accompany them to Medea’s chamber. As soon as they were inside, two of them
seized their father’s wrists, while the third slit his throat. The hot blood gushed
out and Pelias collapsed to the ground, with a look on his face more of
puzzlement than pain. The girls couldn’t wait to stuff his body inside the
cauldron. Three times they circled the cauldron righthandwise, and three times
lefthandwise. But in the night Medea had drained the cauldron and replaced the
rejuvenating elixir with useless soup. Needless to say, the sorceress too had
disappeared overnight.
All the heroes reassembled for the magnificent funeral games in honor of the
dead king. The winners were Zetes and Calaïs in the long footraces—but then, as
sons of the north wind, they had a distinct advantage; Castor won the sprint,
while his brother Polydeuces totally dominated the boxing event; Telamon outthrew all-comers with the discus, as Meleager did with the javelin; Peleus
wrestled all his opponents to exhaustion, even fair Atalanta; Iolaus easily won
the chariot race, and of course no one could match Orpheus at the lyre.
But Jason did not take part, for he was not there. The killing of an uncle,
however wicked he had been, polluted Jason and Medea with the miasma of sin,
and they had to leave Iolcus in the hands of Pelias’ son Acastus. Otherwise, the
pollution would spread and infect the whole city with pestilence and famine.
They settled in Corinth and lived there for a few years in peace, until Jason
decided that, in order to improve his position, he should put aside his foreign
wife and marry Glauce, the princess of Corinth, daughter of King Creon. Medea
seethed inwardly with rage and jealousy, but disguised it well. “This is the right
decision,” she said, “for you and for our children.” But she was lying through
her teeth. She sent Glauce and Creon presents for the wedding, a gorgeous robe
for Glauce and a crown for Creon, and they accepted the gifts with joy.
No sooner had they donned these items of clothing than the poison with which

No sooner had they donned these items of clothing than the poison with which
Medea had imbued them went to work. Glauce’s robe began to burn her, and she
tried to rip it off, but it clung to her like a second skin. She ran shrieking to the
nearest water—still known as Glauce’s spring—and hurled herself into the pool,
seeking relief. But it was no good. Her flesh blistered and her blood boiled, and
she died in sheer agony.
Meanwhile, Creon’s crown tightened on his head like a vice, and still it went on
squeezing, until his skull was crushed and the gray matter of his brains puddled
on the ground below the throne where he slumped. Medea then slit her own
children’s throats, to spite Jason, and flew off in her dragon-drawn chariot to
Athens, where she had been offered refuge by King Aegeus. And apart from the
rumor of an attempt on her stepson Theseus’ life there, the ill-famed sorceress
passes out of the memory of man.
As for Jason, some claim that he took his own life, grieving over the murder of
his children. Others say that he never recovered his luck, and one day, as he
entered the temple of Hera, the cracked stern-piece of the Argo he had dedicated
there in gratitude fell from its plinth and killed him. Those who have been
chosen by the gods for great deeds rarely live to a peaceful old age.

The Calydonian Boar Hunt
The Fates attend all those who bleed and dream—the heroes of legend no less
than us. Fair Althaea, descended from Aeolus, was cousin and consort of
Oeneus, king of Calydon in Aetolia. But one night Ares himself, the god of war,
came and lay in love with Althaea, and in due course of time she gave birth to a
son, and she called him Meleager. But when the boy was no more than seven
days old, the implacable Fates paid her a visit and predicted that Meleager would
die when a particular piece of wood in the fireplace had burned up. “We have
allotted the same span of life,” said the ghastly crones, “to your son and to this
log.” Naturally, Althaea snatched the blazing log from the fire and, once she had
extinguished the flames, she hid it away in a chest that only she knew about.
And the boy grew to be a hardy warrior, strong and proud.
But Fate cannot be averted. The chain of events began when Oeneus angered the
lady Artemis, chaste Mistress of Animals. In his folly, he sacrificed to all the
other gods, but ignored or forgot her. She sent a boar to ravage his land—and not
just any boar, but a monstrous brute, as large as a hulking bull, capable of
uprooting whole trees as it pawed the soil for food. Meleager, expert with javelin

and spear, summoned a true band of heroes to help him hunt down the beast.
Peleus and Telamon came, Castor and Polydeuces, Jason, the inseparable pair
Theseus and Pirithous, Admetus, the soothsayer Amphiaraus, and many others.
There also arrived the fair huntress Atalanta, whom Hippomenes one day would
wed by guile—but, for now, no sooner had Meleager set eyes on her than he fell
in love.
So they set out after the rampaging boar. They found traces of it everywhere:
fallen trees, trunks gashed by tusks, acres of ground churned into a useless mess,
trampled crops. All other wildlife had fled in terror. For seven days they tracked
it, hardly resting even at night. The rocks and logs of the harsh wilderness served
as their only pillows, leaves were their mattresses, and a gibbous moon was all
their illumination.

Heroes gathered at Calydon when angry Artemis plagued the land with a
rampaging boar.[28]
At last they had the beast boxed up in a thicket, and they spread their strong nets
to prevent its escape. But a boar is easily enraged, and fights back when
threatened. For all their stature as heroes, several fell, gored in the groin or the
belly by its savage tusks, bright blood staining the leaf-strewn ground.
Eupalemon and Pelagon fell, and so did Hyleus, Hippasus, and Enaesimus, while

Eupalemon and Pelagon fell, and so did Hyleus, Hippasus, and Enaesimus, while
Eurytion was killed by accident, when Peleus sped his spear too hastily into the
dark and tangled thicket. But then, with a bellow of rage, the monstrous creature
charged into the open—straight at Nestor of Pylos. No one even had time to
shout out a warning, and it looked as though his doom was assured, but he
cannily used his spear to vault into the safety of a tree’s branches.
Despite the encouragement Nestor shouted down to his comrades, it looked as
though the boar would prevail, and even escape to continue its destruction of
Calydon. But then Atalanta drew back her trusty bow, and the arrow grazed the
boar’s back and lodged in the folds of its neck. The sight of red blood made
Ancaeus bold. “Let’s see what a man can do,” he boasted. “This is no work for
women.” As the boar charged at him he let fly with his spear, but missed. The
enraged beast ripped out his bowels with its tusks, and he fell, gasping out his
last breath along with his steaming entrails on the blood-stained ground. Then
Meleager stepped up and released his javelin; it took the beast through the mouth
and brought it crashing in a cloud of dust to the ground, instantly dead. The hide
and tusks belonged by right to Meleager, as the killer of the boar. But to honor
the first strike, and because he desired her, he gave the spoils of the hunt to fair
Atalanta. But his uncles were there, the brothers of Althaea, and they taunted
him for being less than a man. Meleager’s mettle was up, and his father’s blood
flowed dark and strong in his veins. Before any of those present could draw
breath, his mother’s brothers joined the scattered corpses on the hunting ground.
In the depths of her grief, Althaea went to the old chest, the one in which she had
hidden the log all those years ago. She removed the log from its hiding-place and
threw it on the fire, calling upon the Furies as avengers of kindred slaughter.
Meleager immediately felt a burning sensation deep within, and he faded and
died as quickly as an aged log burns in the fire.
But Althaea repented of what she had done, and tore her cheeks, and hanged
herself in sorrow deeper than the sea, while her daughters were turned by
Artemis into guinea hens, and mourn their brother forever with plaintive cries.
But Gorge and Deianeira were spared at the request of Dionysus, for Deianeira
was destined to become the second wife of Heracles; but Gorge bore Tydeus
from incestuous union with her father.

Io and the Danaids
The great city of Argos, rich in horses and cattle, is in the care of Hera, as
Athens is of gray-eyed Athena. Now, Io was the daughter of the river-god

Athens is of gray-eyed Athena. Now, Io was the daughter of the river-god
Inachus and a priestess of Hera at Argos. As Night’s chariot winged its way
across the sky, and the bright foam from his horses’ mouths settled on the earth
as dew, Io was troubled by dreams in which she seemed to hear a voice. “Foolish
girl,” cajoled the voice, deep and serene. “Why do you guard your virginity,
when you could have the greatest of lovers, Zeus himself?”
Night after night the dreams returned, and eventually she gave in to their
insistent clamor. When Zeus visited her, she opened to him not just her arms, but
also her heart. But his behavior had aroused the suspicion of Hera, and she came
in search of him. Just before she caught the lovers, Zeus detected her approach
and changed Io into a cow, as a concrete plea of innocence: “There’s no one
here, just this cow.” But Hera could feign innocence as well as her husband, and
she asked to keep the cow herself. Zeus had no choice but to let her take it.
Hera summoned Argus, an earth-born giant with a hundred eyes that could see in
all directions, already famous for making the district safe against lawless
monsters. She tethered Io to an olive tree within her sanctuary, and set Argus to
guard her, giving him the gift, or curse, of sleeplessness, so that none of his eyes
would ever be tamed by weariness. But Zeus sent Hermes to free Io from
captivity, and once the wily god had lulled Argus the all-seeing to sleep with his
soothing pipes, he promptly cut off his head. But Hera retrieved Argus’ eyes and
put them in the tail of her favored bird, the peacock.

Zeus sent Hermes to kill Argus and free Io; yet jealous Hera continued
tormenting her.[29]
Hera’s dark rage had not yet run its course, however, and she sent a gadfly
which tormented Io so badly that she wandered, as a cow, all over the earth,
denied rest by the irritating bug. Every time she imagined it had gone, it would
return and prick her with its sting. At last she came to Egypt, where with a mere
brush of his fingers, Zeus restored her to human form; and when her son was
born, she called him Epaphus, because she had been impregnated by the tender
touch of Zeus. The royal lines of Egypt and Phoenicia, of Argos, Thebes, and
Crete, all look back to Epaphus as their ancestor.
In Egypt, the great grandsons of Epaphus were Danaus and Aegyptus, fathers
respectively of fifty daughters and fifty sons. Danaus hated his brother, and took
himself and his daughters off to live in exile in Argos. Aegyptus, however,
naturally expected that his sons would marry their cousins and followed them to
Greece. This was a reasonable expectation, and Danaus was not in a position to
stand in his brother’s way—except that he ordered his daughters to kill their
husbands on the very night of the mass wedding, before their husbands had taken
their virginity.

their virginity.
The vile deed took place as planned—or almost as planned: one of the Danaids,
Hypermestra, could not go through with it. She spared her husband Lynceus and
their descendants became the rulers of Argos. But her sisters couldn’t avoid
marriage forever. Danaus arranged a footrace for all their suitors, and the first
across the line took his first choice of woman, the second chose second, and so
on, until all forty-nine were accounted for. Nor could the Danaids avoid
punishment for their terrible crime: in Hades they are condemned eternally to try
to prepare their bridal baths by fetching water in sieves.

Perseus and the Gorgon
Hypermestra, the Danaid who spared her groom, bore him a son. They called
him Abas, and he in his turn had two sons, Proetus and Acrisius. These brothers
fought even in the womb and later divided the realm of Argos between them,
with Acrisius becoming lord of Argos, and Proetus king of Tiryns. Acrisius had
a daughter, Danae, while Proetus had several daughters, whose terrible ten-year
madness is a lesson in not insulting the gods. For abusing her temple, Hera
caused them to dress like slatterns, and to wander the hills imagining themselves
cows. The wise shaman Melampus cured them and received in return a share of
Proetus’ kingdom and a princess bride to bear his children.

Proetus’ kingdom and a princess bride to bear his children.
Now, Acrisius loved his daughter Danae, but naturally he wanted a son and heir
for Argos. He consulted far-shooting Apollo at Delphi, and the news was bitter:
he would have no sons, and a son born of his daughter would kill him. They say
that love conquers all, but Acrisius let fear overcome love: he imprisoned his
dear daughter within an underground chamber of bronze, leaving only a narrow
aperture through which Danae took her meals and breathed sweet air. But Zeus
conceived a passion for Danae, and no prison made by the hands of man can
keep him out. He turned himself into a shower of liquid gold, and poured himself
through the slit. Thus the great god lay in love with Danae.

Zeus came to imprisoned Danae as a shower of gold, and so she conceived
Perseus.[30]
In due course of time a secret son was born, and Danae named him Perseus. The
baby lived with his mother inside their brazen dungeon, but one day Acrisius
heard the metallic echoes of the young boy at play, and Danae’s secret was
discovered. Acrisius laid ungentle hands on his daughter, demanding to know
who the father was. “It was Zeus!” she cried, but Acrisius didn’t believe her. He
locked both mother and child in a wooden chest and tossed them into the sea, so
that he would be absolved of their deaths. But the frail vessel caught in the net of

that he would be absolved of their deaths. But the frail vessel caught in the net of
a fisherman called Dictys, and he took Danae and Perseus to his home on the
island of Seriphos and let them stay with him. The years passed and Perseus
grew up lithe and sleek; it was clear that he was favored by the gods.
Now, honest Dictys’ brother Polydectes, the king of Seriphos, lusted after fair
Danae. But confident in the protection of her son, she always spurned his
unwelcome advances. Polydectes therefore decided to get rid of Perseus, and the
proud youth foolishly made it easy for him. Polydectes invited him, along with
all the important men of the island, to a banquet, supposedly to elicit
contributions for the wedding of Pelops and Hippodamia. Every man was to
provide a horse, but Perseus was not rich enough to own one. The young man
nervously quipped that he could as easily bring Polydectes the head of the
Gorgon as a horse. Seizing his opportunity, Polydectes held him to his word: he
was to fetch the Gorgon’s head. That would remove Perseus from the scene for a
long time—perhaps permanently—and in the meantime Polydectes could have
his way with Danae.
Perseus’ quest began in despair. He knew about the Gorgons: there were three of
them—Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa—and they had originally been the beautiful
daughters of Phorcys and Ceto, children of Earth and Sea. Stheno and Euryale
were fully immortal, but Medusa was as a mortal woman, only far more fair. But
Medusa fell foul of Athena. She claimed her looks rivaled Athena’s own beauty,
and she further angered the chaste goddess by coupling with Poseidon in her
holy sanctuary.
For punishment, all three Gorgons were turned into stubby-winged monsters,
with drooling and engorged tongues, tusks projecting from their mouths,
decaying skin, and poisonous snakes for hair. They were creatures from a
nightmare, and Medusa’s once-alluring eyes turned all who looked directly at
them into stone, forever.
So Perseus wandered to a lonely part of the island and sat down to think. Gulls
wheeled and cried overhead in the salt breeze. And there came to him two
mighty gods, Hermes and Athena, telling him to have no fear. “But what can I
do?” he said. “I can’t just confront the Gorgons.” The gods agreed, and
recommended an oblique course.
“Did you know that the Gorgons have sisters?” they asked. “If anyone knows a
sister’s weaknesses, it’s another sister. You should find the Graeae, and compel
them to tell you how to defeat the Gorgons.” They told him about the three

them to tell you how to defeat the Gorgons.” They told him about the three
Graeae, who had been born and lived as crones, hunched with age, as gray and
chilling as the foam of the sea from which they came; and forestalled his next
nervous question by giving him directions for finding them.
When Perseus reached the distant seashore where the Graeae lived, he asked
them at once for help. “But who are you?” demanded Pemphredo, staring in his
direction out of eyeless sockets, ghastly to behold.
“It’s a young man,” croaked her sister Deino. “I’ve got the eye, so I can see.”
“Give it here, then,” rasped Pemphredo. There was a soft sucking noise as Deino
pried the slick orb out of her socket and handed it to her sister. The eye sank into
her head with a squelch, and after taking stock of Perseus she passed the eye
over to her other sister, Enyo. “Swap you for the tooth,” she said. “I’ve still got a
bit of raw octopus left to chew.”
As Perseus submitted to the scrutiny of the strange creatures, he blushed—but an
idea occurred to him. He could see that the Graeae had only the one tooth and
the one eye between them, and depended on them utterly. Slowly, carefully, he
edged closer to the grizzled women. His moment came when both the eye and
the tooth were in transit from one Graea to another: Perseus grabbed them and
stepped back. The shrieks of the crones were terrible to hear—at once like a
seagull’s harsh scream and the wind keening over storm waves. “Give them
back, give them back, give them back!” they cried.
“No!” said Perseus. “Not until you tell me how your sisters can be defeated.” At
first the Graeae refused, out of loyalty to their kin. Perseus, calling their bluff,
began to walk away with the hostage bits, his feet crunching on the shingle, but
he hadn’t gone far when they called him back and agreed to help him. He
pressed the eye and the tooth into the unseeing hands of Deino, and the grizzled
creatures burst into sing-song voice.
“Far distant is the home of our sisters,” they said, “on the western shores of
Ocean, close to the entrance to the underworld. Months will pass in the journey,
or even years, unless you have some magical means of transport. And beware!
Their senses are very acute: it would be best to be invisible. Furthermore, even if
you succeed in decapitating our sister Medusa, what will you do with the head?
You can’t leave it uncovered, because it will turn everything that looks at it—
including you, perhaps—into stone forever.” Perseus found their advice
distinctly unhelpful. His task seemed even more impossible than before. “So I’ve

distinctly unhelpful. His task seemed even more impossible than before. “So I’ve
got to be able to fly,” he said, “and be invisible, and safely transport the
Gorgon’s lethal head. Unfortunately, I can’t do any of these things.”

Perseus kept the one eye of the three Graeae until they aided him in his quest for
Medusa.[31]
“But fortunately,” said the Graeae, “we know how you can acquire these
abilities. After the transformation of our sisters, Poseidon entrusted certain items
to some of his daughters, the sea nymphs. He was worried in case the Gorgons
might run amok and terrify the world, so he had to leave the means of their
destruction in safe keeping.” And they told Perseus how to find the nymphs.
Away he sped on his mission, and the nymphs saw in him a true hero and
graciously loaned him a cap of darkness, a pair of winged sandals, and a special
satchel. Hermes gave him a wickedly sharp sword, and when he drew it from its
sheath a cold wind whistled across the blade, and it showed no reflection of the
moon’s shining.
Perseus flew with his sky shoes to the edge of the world, near the source of the
vast river Ocean that sweeps around the continents of the earth, and found the
foul Gorgons asleep. Once he had spotted them from on high, he donned his cap
of invisibility and swooped down. Acting on the advice of Athena and Hermes,
he used his bronze shield as a mirror, to avoid the direct gaze of Medusa. Even
with this handicap, he managed to cut off her head cleanly, with one slice.
Immediately, through the Gorgon’s severed neck, leapt her children by
Poseidon: the winged horse Pegasus, and the horse’s human twin, Chrysaor, the

Poseidon: the winged horse Pegasus, and the horse’s human twin, Chrysaor, the
father of Geryon.
All this turmoil awoke Medusa’s sisters, and the snakes on their heads seemed to
have the power to penetrate the aura of invisibility with which he was
surrounded. Perseus quickly stuffed the head into the satchel and flew off, while
the hideous twins screeched and raved futilely, and their serpent hair writhed and
hissed. As he flew over the desert of Africa, drops of blood fell from the satchel
and the ground thus inseminated gave birth to all the poisonous snakes that dwell
there.

All who gaze at the Gorgon Medusa turn to stone forever.[32]
*
When Perseus reached the coast of Palestine, an extraordinary sight greeted his
eyes. A young woman was struggling helplessly against chains that bound her to
a jagged rock, so close to the water’s edge that salt spray mingled with the tears
on her face. The curious hero landed, tucked away his cap of darkness, and made
inquiries in the local town. The woman was Andromeda, the daughter of the
king, Cepheus. And it was he, her reluctant father, who had ordered her to be
bound and left for a savage sea monster to devour, because this, he had been
told, was the only way to stop its ruinous raids on his land. The monster had

told, was the only way to stop its ruinous raids on his land. The monster had
been sent by sea nymphs, because Andromeda’s mother had boasted that her
daughter was more beautiful than them. Sometimes, the sins of the mother are
visited upon the daughter.
Perseus was so taken by the girl that he was inclined to agree with her mother’s
assessment of her charms, and he began to negotiate with Cepheus: the hand of
Andromeda if he could get rid of the monster. The bargain struck, Perseus didn’t
hesitate. He returned straight away to the rock and freed fair Andromeda … just
in time, for already they could see the creature breasting the foam, forging a
furrow in the sea toward them as straight as a plow in soft and stoneless earth.

Perseus rescued Andromeda from a grisly fate as an offering to a sea monster.
[33]

Perseus rose into the air on his winged sandals, and drove the creature mad with
fury by hovering just out of reach of its snapping jaws. Time and again he
returned to earth, each time to collect ever larger boulders, with which he
stunned the monster and drove it off. He and Andromeda returned in joy to the
palace, already committed to each other, but when Perseus claimed his prize,
Cepheus’ brother Phineus objected, for he wanted Andromeda for himself. He
lured the young man into an ambush—but nimble Perseus found time to close
his eyes and yank the petrifying head out of its satchel. Perseus swept
Andromeda into his arms and together they flew back to Seriphos. There they
found Danae and Dictys huddled fearfully at an altar, to which they had fled for

refuge from Polydectes’ violence. Both, in their different ways, had been abused
by the king, and they greeted the returning hero with tears of hope. Perseus
strode into Polydectes’ palace, the uninvited guest, the bringer of death. He
found the king at banquet, surrounded by his supporters, in his lofty reception
hall.
“And did you get me the Gorgon’s head?” the king taunted. Perseus reached in
and pulled the ghastly object out of his satchel, while averting his gaze.
Polydectes and all the others were instantly turned to stone, the mocking
laughter frozen forever on their sneering lips. A quick smile flitted across
Perseus’ face.
After he had returned the magical objects to Hermes, Perseus gave the Gorgon’s
head to Athena, who set it in the middle of her aegis forever.
She is a terrible goddess, and anyone who sees her as she is freezes in awe and
fear. Then the young hero returned with Danae and Andromeda to Argos.
Acrisius, hearing of their arrival, fled, but Perseus set out in pursuit. He caught
up with his grandfather in Thessaly, and the two were reconciled, but there is no
escaping the word of Fate. Perseus agreed to take part in an athletic competition,
and the discus that he threw accidentally struck and killed Acrisius. Polluted
even by this unintentional murder, Perseus exiled himself from Argos, but took
nearby Tiryns as his seat after his great-uncle Proetus’ death. He also founded
golden Mycenae, and in both places the Cyclopes built the massive defensive
walls for him, which still stand after all this time.

Bellerophon
As Perseus stands to Argos, Theseus to Athens, and Heracles to the Peloponnese

As Perseus stands to Argos, Theseus to Athens, and Heracles to the Peloponnese
as a whole, so Bellerophon stands to Corinth, the greatest of its heroes. His
grandfather was Sisyphus, and his mother had been loved by Poseidon, whose
child she said he was. But he was compelled to leave the land of his birth after
accidentally killing a brother, and he settled in Tiryns, under King Proetus.
The handsome youth attracted the fancy of the queen, Stheneboea. She began by
flirting with him in secret, which was tolerable, if uncomfortable, but in the end
she demanded an assignation. Bellerophon refused her, but hell truly has no fury
like a woman scorned, and Stheneboea told her husband that Bellerophon had
tried to rape her. Blinded by his desire for revenge, Proetus sent Bellerophon to
his wife’s father Iobates, king of Lycia, with a sealed letter containing
Stheneboea’s charges—and the request that Iobates get rid of his young visitor,
permanently. In order to encompass his death, Iobates therefore set him to
cleanse Lycia of its plagues. By rights, any one of the tasks should kill him.
Iobates could only win: either Bellerophon would die, or, if he succeeded, Lycia
would at least have been freed from terror.
Bellerophon, however, was beloved of the gods. Poseidon gave him his son
Pegasus, the white, winged horse that had sprung from Medusa’s severed neck.
But Pegasus was wild and untamed, and nothing Bellerophon could do would
make the proud steed obedient to his commands. Keen-eyed Athena, noticing the
boy’s trouble, and wanting to help, came down by night from Olympus with a
magic bridle, and with this he was able to mount and control the splendid
creature. After a bit of practice, he found that he could fire his arrows with
deadly accuracy, while gripping the flanks of the winged horse with his knees
and thighs, and he soared up to the heavens and swooped toward the earth in
delight. As he sped through the air, his dark cape flowed gracefully out behind
him, and peasants working in the fields stared up at the sky in awe and
amazement.
All his labors met with success. First he shot down the fire-breathing Chimera,
dread offshoot of Typhoeus, which was ravaging Iobates’ land—three deadly
arrows in quick succession, one for each of the creatures that made up its body.
Then he expelled the wild Solymi, the first inhabitants of Lycia, and drove them
into the mountain fastnesses where they still live. Finally, he quelled the
Amazons, for the warrior women were raiding Iobates’ territory.

Destroying the fire-breathing Chimera—equal parts lion, she-goat, and snake—
was Bellerophon’s first task.[34]
Having singlehandedly done all that Iobates wanted, Bellerophon set out in
triumph back to the king’s palace. But the treacherous king, true only to Proetus’
request, sent a strong force of his men to conceal themselves and take the young
hero unawares. Not one of the ambushers returned alive, and at last Iobates was
forced to recognize that Bellerophon was under the special protection of the
gods. He realized that his daughter had been lying, and in recompense gave
Bellerophon half his kingdom and another daughter’s hand in marriage. When
she learned that her shamelessness and lies had been revealed, Stheneboea killed
herself rather than live with the humiliation.
But being dear to the gods is not a sufficient shield against arrogance. Men
encompass their own destruction. Bellerophon took it into his head one day to
ride on Pegasus’ back up to heaven, to remonstrate with the gods about the
injustice of life on earth. Who among us has not wished to do such a thing? But
the great steed, mindful of his father, refused to have anything to do with such a
foolish enterprise, and bucked his rider off to the ground. Bellerophon broke
both hips and spent the rest of his life as a wretched cripple. Perhaps in the end

both hips and spent the rest of his life as a wretched cripple. Perhaps in the end
he learned wisdom, but the storytellers do not say.

Chapter Five
THEBES IN THE AGE OF HEROES
Cadmus, Europa, and the Foundation of Thebes
Cadmus, son of Agenor, was king of Phoenician Tyre, and grandson of Epaphus.
He had a sister called Europa, who was so fair of face and form that her beauty
came to the attention of Zeus. The son of Cronus changed himself into a
magnificent white bull and drew near her. The maiden was fascinated by this
bull: so massive and powerful, and yet so gentle. Quelling her fearful fancies,
she approached the majestic creature and stroked its panting muzzle. The bull
breathed the scent of saffron, and when it bowed its forelegs to the ground, the
girl sat, sideways but secure, on its back.

Immediately, the bull raced for the coast, and Europa clung on in terror. The
magnificent creature plunged into the sea and swam forcefully for the island of
Crete. When they came ashore, Zeus shed his disguise as a bull and had his way
with her. And she bore him Minos, the wise king of Crete who became a judge
of the dead, as did his brother Rhadamanthys.

Europa clung on in terror as the bull plunged into the sea.[35]
But Agenor sent his sons to find her, for he had no idea where she had gone, so
silent and swift had Zeus’ abduction been. Phoenix he sent north, where he
founded the Phoenician race; Cilix futilely searched in the east, and settled at last
in the land known since as Cilicia; but Cadmus was sent west.
Arriving in Greece, he made his way to Delphi to ask Apollo’s advice. The
golden god told him that Europa’s destiny was not his concern, and enjoined him
to follow the first cow he encountered after leaving the Delphic precinct. He was
to found a city wherever the cow first took her rest. After a while, he did indeed
come across a cow, and she lumbered to her feet as soon as she saw him. She set
off east, and Cadmus followed, and founded the great city of Thebes where she
took her rest. In proper thanksgiving for the end of his travels, he decided to
sacrifice the cow, and he sent his men out to find water. But a formidable
dragon, a pet of Ares, guarded the spring, and many of Cadmus’ men were
ripped apart by the vicious creature’s fangs, or crushed in its coils, until Cadmus
himself came up and slew it in its pride with a rock that broke its skull. The cow
was duly sacrificed to Athena. In return the keen-eyed goddess gave Cadmus
some advice: to honor Ares and the previous occupants of the land by sowing the
serpent’s teeth in the ground. But as soon as he planted the razor-sharp teeth,

serpent’s teeth in the ground. But as soon as he planted the razor-sharp teeth,
armed warriors sprang up from the tilled furrows.
Responding out of sheer instinct, Cadmus wrapped his muscular arms around a
boulder resting at the edge of the field and lobbed it into their midst. The
warriors, more like automata than thinking men, supposed that one of their
number had done it, and fell to fighting among themselves.
In the end, only five of the Sown Men remained, and from these five are
descended the five noble families of Thebes. But Athena and Ares reserved half
the teeth and gave them to King Aeëtes of Colchis, who found a use for them
when Hera’s favorite Jason came to his land.
Zeus awarded Cadmus as his wife Harmonia, daughter of Ares and Aphrodite,
but first he had to work as Ares’ servant for a year, in recompense for the slaying
of the dragon. All the gods and goddesses, including the Muses and the Graces,
came to the acropolis of Thebes, to celebrate the wedding. Among the bride-gifts
for Harmonia was a marvelous necklace, made for her by no less a craftsman
than Hephaestus, to be a priceless heirloom for her descendants. But an heirloom
is not only precious: it carries the fortune of the family down from one
generation to the next, whether that fortune be good or bad.
As well as a son, Polydorus, the royal couple had four daughters: Semele, who
became the mother of Dionysus; Ino, who nursed Dionysus and tried to do away
with Phrixus and Helle; Autonoe, mother of the hunter Actaeon whose love
Semele spurned; and Agave, who along with Autonoe was driven mad by
Dionysus and tore her son Pentheus to shreds with her own hands and teeth. At
the ends of their lives, Cadmus and Harmonia became serpents themselves,
while their spirits live forever in bliss in the Elysian Fields. But after Polydorus
the throne of Thebes passed to Cadmus’ doomed grandson, Pentheus, who, as
we have seen, brought about his own destruction by resisting the rites of the
twice-born god of liberation.

Dionysus, god of liberation, rides a panther, the symbol of desire.[36]

Oedipus
A terrible plague held the land of Thebes in its deadly grip; the crops were
stricken with blight and the people began to die of disease and starvation. For in
Greece the line between a good year and a bad one is very fine. As is proper for
the king in such times, Oedipus consulted the oracle at Delphi, and was told that
Thebes was polluted by the murder of Laius, the previous king, for the murderer
was still at large.
And Oedipus swore a terrible oath, that the murderer should be found and
punished, whoever he was, with the most terrible punishments. He should be
stripped of his family and belongings, flogged, and driven from the land to live
out his days as a rootless beggar. No one was to talk to him; no one was to offer
him shelter or the warmth of Hestia’s fire; no one was to feed him. If he
survived, he would be gnawed forever by guilt and serve as prey to passing
brigands. But who was the guilty man?
After the death of Pentheus, the rulership of Thebes had descended into chaos.

After the death of Pentheus, the rulership of Thebes had descended into chaos.
Eventually Labdacus began a new line, but he too died resisting Dionysus, and
the throne passed to his infant son Laius. As often happens, the young king’s
regent, a man called Lycus, usurped the throne. Now, Lycus’ niece, Antiope,
was loved by Zeus, and gave birth in secret to twin boys. But knowing that
Lycus would see them as rivals and kill them, she left the infants at the city
gates. They were taken in and brought up by a childless shepherd couple, whom
they charmed with their infant smiles and dimples. The happy peasants named
them Amphion and Zethus.
Out together one day, the young men met a disheveled and distraught woman,
whom at first they took to be a runaway slave. After questioning her, however,
and finding out that she was Antiope, they began to suspect the truth about their
origins. Both boys looked remarkably like this strange woman. But just then
Lycus’ wife Dirce arrived with an armed escort, to haul Antiope back to Thebes,
back to the life of constant torment and humiliation to which Dirce subjected
her.
Zethus and Amphion questioned the shepherd and his wife, and the truth came
out amid many tears. The boys saw it now as their duty to save their true mother
from Dirce’s hands. Zethus was in favor of taking immediate and drastic action,
but the gentle musician Amphion needed persuading. In the end they avenged
their mother’s long years of distress by having Dirce tied to the horns of a bull
and dragged to her death; but sweet water sprang from the face of the rock at the
place of her death in Thebes, and the spring still bears her name. Lycus received
no further punishment beyond banishment. Amphion and Zethus also banished
Laius, who was on the threshold of adulthood. They ruled together, but not
amicably, and their reign was beset with woes.
Zethus was married to Aedon, and Amphion to Niobe, whose foolish boast led,
as we have seen, to the massacre of her children, and endless sorrow. But even
earlier her children had been at risk, victims of the jealousy of her sister-in-law.
Aedon determined to kill one of Niobe’s children, but mistook the child’s bed at
night and killed her own son. When she realized her terrible error, she prayed to
be taken from this earth. Her prayer was answered, and she became the first
nightingale.
Amphion and Zethus are remembered as secondary founders, after Cadmus, of
the seven-gated city of Thebes. They enlarged the city and built its defensive

walls. Nor did they just supervise the building, as kings generally do: the
massive stones were summoned and leapt into place under the spell of
Amphion’s lyre. On their deaths, Laius returned from exile and resumed the
throne of Thebes. During his exile, Laius had been taken in and made welcome
by Pelops, king of Elis. But when he left he abused the sacred bonds of
friendship and hospitality by abducting Pelops’ son Chrysippus, with whom he
was in love. But Chrysippus killed himself for shame, and Pelops called down
the curses of the gods on Laius and his descendants for the death of his beloved
son.
Later, when Laius was king of Thebes, he consulted the oracle at Delphi to learn
if his wife Jocasta would bear him any children, and he was told that, if he truly
wanted to protect the city, he should avoid having children, and also that, if
Jocasta did bear him a son, that son would kill him. And Apollo made it plain
that Pelops’ curse was the cause.
But Laius in his folly ignored the oracle, and in due course of time a son was
born. In an attempt to avoid the unavoidable, Laius ordered him exposed on a
nearby mountain, with an iron pin driven through his ankle. Needless to say—for
the curse had long to run yet—the slave who had been given the job of
abandoning the baby in the wilderness gave him out of pity to a kindly shepherd.
The countryman passed the child on to Polybus, king of Corinth, and Polybus
brought him up as his own. The boy’s wound recovered, but ever after he was
known as Oedipus, Clubfoot.
Years later, Oedipus began to suspect that he was not the natural son of King
Polybus and Queen Merope. He paid a visit to Delphi and asked the oracle who
his parents were. The oracle, as often, didn’t reply directly, but told him that he
must never set foot on his native soil, since he was destined to kill his father and
marry his mother. Naturally, Oedipus chose never to return to Corinth, which he
took to be the country of his birth—and he set out on the road from Delphi that
led to Thebes, walking easily, with his long, dark hair tied up with a fillet, and
his brow furrowed with concern. It seemed he had a hard road ahead of him.
It’s well known that crossroads and junctions are places of danger and mystery,
where ghosts congregate and Hecate rules. Oedipus arrived at such a place just
as a chariot came clattering up, the driver and passenger unconcerned for the
young wanderer with whom they shared the narrow road. To avoid being
crushed, Oedipus leapt aside onto the rough shoulder, but then he sprinted
alongside the chariot, shouting angrily and grabbing for the driver. At this, the

alongside the chariot, shouting angrily and grabbing for the driver. At this, the
passenger, an elderly man with cold eyes, struck him hard on the head with a
whip. In an instant, quick-tempered Oedipus pulled the man from the back of the
chariot and killed him for the insult. It was, of course, his true father, Laius,
though Oedipus had no idea that he had just fulfilled the first part of the
prophecy. Ironically, Laius had been on his way to Delphi to ask whether the son
had survived, whom he had abandoned so long ago.
When Oedipus reached Thebes some time later, he found the city mourning its
dead king and afflicted by the Sphinx—a monstrous creature with the face of a
woman, the body of a lion, and the wings of an eagle. It had blocked the gates to
the city and set about terrorizing all who sought exit or entry by demanding the
answer to a riddle it had learned from the Muses: “What goes on four legs at
dawn, two legs at midday, and three legs in the evening?” The beast proceeded
to devour all who failed to give the right answer, and the city was soon
threatened with losing all of its best and brightest, for many tried but none could
find the solution.
Queen Jocasta’s brother Creon was acting as regent since the death of Laius, and
was desperate enough to offer the throne of Thebes and his sister’s hand in
marriage to anyone who could rid the land of the riddling pest. Oedipus,
confident in his wits, boldly confronted the Sphinx at the mouth of its cliff-top
cave. “‘Man’ is the answer,” he said. “As an infant, he crawls; as an adult he
walks on two legs; and in the evening of his life he supports himself with a
cane.” In anguished surprise at the abrupt end to its deadly game, the Sphinx
hurled itself with a blood-curdling howl off the precipice. Oedipus gained the
throne and married Jocasta. Apollo’s words had come to pass.

“What goes on four legs at dawn, two legs at midday, and three legs in the
evening?.”[37]
Ignorance can be bliss, and for many years Thebes and Oedipus thrived. He and
Jocasta had two sons, Eteocles and Polynices, and two daughters, Antigone and
Ismene. But then the plague struck, and in his blindness Oedipus cursed the man
who had brought pollution down upon his people by murdering King Laius.
At this point, Polybus died, and a messenger arrived from Corinth, offering the
now-vacant throne to Oedipus. But Oedipus refused: he was mindful of the
prophecy, and still thought that Polybus and Merope were his parents. But when
he explained his refusal, the messenger, in all innocence, told him not to worry,
because in their childlessness Polybus and Merope had adopted him. “I know

because in their childlessness Polybus and Merope had adopted him. “I know
they aren’t your true parents,” said the messenger, “because I am the very
shepherd who took you in when you had been abandoned as an infant in the
hills.”
A trifling snowball gathers further bulk as it rolls down the mountainside, until it
becomes a devastating avalanche; just so, the evidence accumulated, until the
truth was unavoidable. Oedipus was himself the cause of his people’s suffering,
and he had indeed killed his father and married his mother, as the oracle had
foretold. Jocasta hanged herself in horror at her incest, and on discovering her
lifeless body, still warm and swaying, Oedipus blinded himself with a brooch
torn from her robe. Creon became regent again, and blind Oedipus locked
himself away in the recesses of the palace.
But there still remained plenty of energy in Pelops’ curse. Alone in his selfimposed prison, Oedipus’ tortured mind was prey to irrational fears and
fantasies. Though he did not forgive himself, he was well looked after by his
sons, Eteocles and Polynices.
One day, after making a sacrifice, they brought a special treat for their father.
Rather than the usual poor cut of meat, they presented him with a meaty haunch
served on a silver plate that had belonged to all the kings of Thebes since the
time of Cadmus. But in his madness Oedipus took this as a cruel reminder of his
condition, as a king brought low and denied luxury. He shouted for the gods to
take note, and over the haunch, now turned sacrificial victim, Oedipus called
down Pelops’ curse afresh on the heads of his own sons. He doomed them to
divide their kingdom with the sword, and die at each other’s hands.

The Seven against Thebes
So the Theban princes, Eteocles and Polynices, Oedipus’ sons and brothers,
came of age. They both wanted the throne of Thebes, and adopted a compromise
that was bound to fail, whereby each of them would rule for a year, while the
other made himself scarce. Eteocles ruled first, with Polynices spending the year
in Argos, at the court of King Adrastus. As insurance, he took with him the
family heirloom—the fabulous necklace made for Harmonia by Hephaestus.
Nevertheless, at the end of the year, Eteocles refused to give up the throne.
Power had gone to his head.
During his year of exile Polynices had married one of Adrastus’ daughters, and
the Argive king now promised to help restore him to his throne. After all, there

the Argive king now promised to help restore him to his throne. After all, there
was far more point in having a king as a son-in-law than a homeless exile.
Adrastus assembled an army that was led by seven champions: himself,
Polynices, Tydeus, Capaneus, Hippomedon, Parthenopaeus, and the soothsayer
Amphiaraus.
Amphiaraus at first refused to join the expedition; he knew by divination that he
would not return from it. He went into hiding, and his absence threatened to
abort the effort altogether. But his wife was bribed by Polynices with the cursed
necklace of Harmonia. She revealed her husband’s hiding-place, and
Amphiaraus bravely accepted his fate. The Seven descended on Thebes as
wolves descend from the hills in winter to steal defenseless lambs. They were
seven only, but they were a match for seven hundred ordinary men.
Their route took them past Nemea, where they found Hypsipyle, the former
queen of Lemnos. A victim of warfare, she was bound in servitude to the local
king, Lycurgus, as the nursemaid of his infant son and heir. Adrastus’ troops
were short of water, and Hypsipyle offered to show them the way to a spring.
She laid the cradle containing her young charge on the ground, but while she
was away a serpent came and devoured the child. When the Seven had quenched
their thirst, they returned to a scene of bloody horror, with the mangled remains
of the baby scattered on the ground or dribbling out of the monster’s mouth. Too
late, they killed the serpent. But to honor the baby who died so that they might
quench their thirst, they instituted games that are still held today, once every four
years, like the games at Olympia.
The heroes found the seven-mouthed city of Thebes well defended; seven
warriors had volunteered to hold the gates against the enemy. The Thebans were
not defenseless lambs, after all. The Theban seer Teiresias foretold that the city
would not fall as long as one of the descendants of the original five Sown Men
sacrificed himself. If this happened, said Teiresias, the debt incurred by Cadmus’
killing of Ares’ dragon would finally have been paid off, and the city would
survive the assault. Menoeceus willingly sacrificed himself on the very spot
where the dragon’s lair had been, but still it seemed that the fate of the city hung
in the balance.
The Seven met the seven Theban champions in single combat to decide the war,
one at each of the city’s gates. It was an outright victory for the Thebans. Of the
attackers, only Capaneus succeeded in scaling the walls. But once he reached the
top he crowed that not even the fire of Zeus could stop him—but it did, because
dark-browed Zeus struck him with a bolt of lightning for his arrogance. Even

dark-browed Zeus struck him with a bolt of lightning for his arrogance. Even
Tydeus died, though he was a favorite of Athena. When he was fatally wounded
by Melanippus, the goddess flew down from Olympus to administer a potion of
immortality to the dying warrior, and transport him afterward to bright Olympus.
But Amphiaraus, who hated Tydeus, killed Melanippus and gave Tydeus his
brains to eat. “In this way,” he suggested, “you will gain the dead man’s spirit,
and live.” Amphiaraus’ grim design was realized: when Athena saw her favorite
at his obscene meal, she withdrew in disgust, and Tydeus died a mortal’s death.

Capaneus scaled the walls of Thebes, but Zeus blasted him for arrogance.[38]
Of the Seven, only Adrastus and Amphiaraus survived the failed siege of
Thebes. They fled the battlefield. Adrastus made it safely back to Argos, but the
earth gaped before Amphiaraus as he was driving his chariot away. Still in a fury
at the doomed expedition, he welcomed death at a gallop and kept a firm grip on
his bright-maned horses as they plunged into the underworld. Henceforth
Amphiaraus is worshipped as a superhuman healer, who visits men and women
in their dreams and instructs them in their cures.
As for the two brothers, Eteocles and Polynices, they traded blows and wounds
in a fight that was so close and fierce that in the end they both died. It was as
well that their mother was no longer alive to see the pitiful spectacle and their
father’s curse fulfilled.

Creon, once again the emergency ruler of Thebes, gave orders that Polynices and
the rest of the aggressors from Argos were not to be honored with burial. But
Antigone could not abide this sin against her dead brother. Her sister Ismene
counseled caution and obedience, but Antigone pushed her aside and defiantly
gave Polynices at least the symbolic burial of three handfuls of dust thrown on
his corpse. She preferred the unwritten law of the gods to Creon’s edict, and was
prepared even to suffer death for it. Creon had her walled up, to starve to death,
but Haemon, his son and Antigone’s betrothed, broke in to rescue her. Finding
that she had hanged herself with her girdle rather than face a slow and painful
death, he slew himself on the spot with his sword. And Creon’s wife did the
same when she heard of the death of her son. Creon was well paid for ignoring
the gods’ wishes.
But Thebes did fall ten years later, to the sons of the Seven, led by Amphiaraus’
son Alcmaeon. Teiresias saw that this time the destruction of the city was
inevitable, and ordered its evacuation, so that at least human lives would be
spared. But his daughter Daphne was captured, and sent by Alcmaeon to Delphi,
where she became the first of the Sibyls—the first of those who can open
themselves up to Apollo and speak for him.
Alcmaeon also paid his mother back for her treachery by slitting her throat and
taking the necklace of Harmonia. As a matricide, the Furies hounded him from
place to place, but he gained temporary shelter in Arcadia, where he married the
king’s daughter Arsinoe, and gave her the necklace. But he was a murderer, a
matricide, and soon a plague descended on Arcadia. Knowing himself to be the
cause, he left, seeking purification for his sin.
On the advice of an oracle, he sought a land on which the sun had not shone
when he killed his mother. Eventually, he found a place that fitted this
description at the mouth of the river Achelous, where silt carried down the river
had formed new land, and he married fair-flowing Callirhoe there, the daughter
of the river-god.
But Callirhoe had heard of the precious necklace, and insisted that Alcmaeon
return to Arcadia and get it back. He did so, pretending that he had to take the
necklace to Delphi to complete his purification, but when Arsinoe’s brothers
learned of the trick, they killed him and retrieved the accursed bauble. Callirhoe
prayed that her young sons might immediately be old enough to take their
vengeance, and the gods granted her prayer. The curse of the necklace at last
came to an end when the boys, so suddenly elevated to young manhood, gave it

came to an end when the boys, so suddenly elevated to young manhood, gave it
to Apollo at Delphi.

Chapter Six
MYCENAE IN THE AGE OF HEROES
The Curse of the House of Atreus
The royal house of Mycenae suffered no less than the Labdacid house of Thebes
from the effects of a deadly curse. It all started with Tantalus, son of Zeus and
king of Mount Sipylus in Lydia. What everyone knows about Tantalus is that he
is “tantalized”: his punishment in Hades is to stand up to his chin in a pool of
water, which sinks into the ground every time he tries to drink from it, while
above his head a tree laden with all the appetizing fruits of the world raises its
branches out of his reach every time he tries to pluck one of the fruits. But what
did he do to get there?

The trouble was that he was too familiar with the gods. He used to dine with
them, he was privy to their counsels, he hobnobbed with them on a daily basis.
Familiarity, as we know, breeds contempt, and over time Tantalus got to know
the gods so well that he began to doubt their powers. It was said that he stole
some nectar and ambrosia from Olympus, the food and drink of the gods, and
distributed it among mortals. He gave mortal men a glimpse of heaven, though
they called it a dream, a hallucination. He might have been punished for that

they called it a dream, a hallucination. He might have been punished for that
alone, but his crime was far worse, far more hideous.
The method he chose to test their powers was perverse in the extreme. He
invited them all to dinner, all the great Olympians, and served them up a special
dish. He had chopped up his own son Pelops and cooked the body parts in a rich
sauce. The gods sat down to table and addressed their dinner—but all of them
immediately pulled back in horror, proving their powers of discernment. All, that
is, except for Demeter, who, distracted and pining for her daughter—it was the
time of year when the pale queen was dwelling in the underworld—chewed and
swallowed a juicy chunk of the boy’s shoulder before realizing her mistake.

Tantalus hosted a banquet for the gods—with his own son Pelops as the entrée.
[39]

Appalled at what Tantalus had done, the gods took pity on the roasted youth, and
in a rare show of unity and cooperation, they worked together to restore Pelops
to life. The only difficulty was the bit that Demeter had eaten; and so ever after
Pelops had an ivory shoulder, the first prosthetic, designed by Hermes and

Pelops had an ivory shoulder, the first prosthetic, designed by Hermes and
fashioned by Hephaestus. For his abominable meal Tantalus was sent down to
Hades, to be denied food and drink forever—and, like Sisyphus, Tityus, and
Ixion, to serve as a warning to future criminals.
When Pelops was grown up, he migrated from Asia to the southern part of
Greece, the part that still bears his name: the island of Pelops, the Peloponnese.
His sister Niobe also left her native land to marry Amphion of Thebes—but she
was fated to be carried lamenting back home to Lydia, and to weep cold tears
there forever. Pelops came in the first instance to win the hand of Hippodamia,
daughter of Oenomaus, who was a son of Ares and king of Olympia. Now,
Oenomaus was known to be an outstanding chariot-racer, and he would give his
daughter away only to the man who could beat him in a race all the way across
the Peloponnese from Olympia, over some of the most rugged terrain Greece has
to offer. Thirteen brave men had already tried, but all had failed, and their heads
were fixed above the doors of Oenomaus’ palace. For he loved his daughter
himself, and wanted no other man to possess her.
Pelops was beloved of Poseidon, and the earth-shaker supplied the young hero
with a magnificent chariot for the race. Even so, Pelops was not at all sure he
could win, given that Oenomaus’ horses, as was well known, could outstrip
Boreas, the north wind. Oenomaus’ groom was called Myrtilus, and his father
was the god Hermes. Oenomaus should have known better than to trust a son of
the god of thieves and trickery.
Before the race, Pelops suborned Myrtilus by offering him half the kingdom he
would gain by winning. Myrtilus agreed, and sabotaged Oenomaus’ chariot by
changing the metal linchpins—the pins that joined the wheel to the axle—for
realistic-looking pins of wax. So the day of the race arrived. It was Oenomaus’
practice to give the suitor a head start, and then catch up and kill him. And every
suitor carried Hippodamia in his chariot, because the game that Oenomaus liked
to play was that his daughter was being abducted, and that he was giving
indignant chase. So off set Pelops and Hippodamia, and before long Oenomaus
set out after them, with no reason to think that there wouldn’t soon be a
fourteenth head adorning his doorway.
No sooner had his godlike horses got up to full speed than the fake linchpins
gave way. Oenomaus crashed to the ground amid a jumble of smashed wood and
jagged metal, and was dragged by his horses over the rocky ground to a bloody
death. Though Hippodamia grieved over the death of her father, she accepted the
rules: she was Pelops’ prize.

rules: she was Pelops’ prize.

The end of the chariot race brought Pelops his bride and his kingdom.[40]
Myrtilus met them at the wreckage, to gloat over his success. And he seemed to
think that his half of the kingdom included Hippodamia, because he began to
molest her. Pelops leapt on the false groom and bound him fast. Myrtilus
promised to leave Hippodamia alone, and reminded Pelops that he was owed
half the kingdom, but Pelops was in no mood to listen.
The highest cliffs he knew were on the east coast of the Peloponnese, and at the
earliest possible opportunity he drove over there with his prisoner. He made sure
that the man knew what was about to happen, smiled at the dread on his face,
and pushed him over the edge. Myrtilus plummeted hundreds of feet to his
death, and the sea is named the Myrtoan Sea after him. But all the way down, as

death, and the sea is named the Myrtoan Sea after him. But all the way down, as
Myrtilus fell, he cried out a curse on Pelops and his descendants. And a true
curse from the son of a god is always effective.

Atreus and Thyestes
Pelops ruled the kingdom of Olympia for a good many years, until he and his
family almost came to believe that Myrtilus’ curse had no power. Now, an oracle
had proclaimed that a son of Pelops should be king of Mycenae, but when his
two eldest sons, Thyestes and Atreus, went to the golden citadel to claim their
inheritance, they fell murderously out with each other. It was Hermes’ doing:
angry at the death of Myrtilus, and determined to implement the curse, he sent a
shepherd to Mycenae, bearing a golden lamb that had miraculously been born in
his flock. The lamb was a clear token of kingship, and Atreus’ claim to the
throne was confirmed by the fact that the shepherd gave it to him, not his
brother. In fact, the “shepherd” may have been the god Pan in disguise, acting on
his father Hermes’ instructions.
Atreus immediately began to prepare for his coronation ceremony, but Thyestes
had not given up. He seduced Aerope, his own brother’s wife, and she gave him
the fabulous lamb in secret. All the nobles and commons assembled for the
glorious ceremony—and it was Thyestes who appeared with the lamb and was
crowned king.
But the contest was not over yet. Zeus favored the kingship of Atreus, and he
sent Hermes to whisper in Atreus’ mind. Atreus listened, and knew that the
words came from a god. He declared to the people of Mycenae that his right to
the throne would be heralded by a portent far greater than a mere golden lamb.
And Zeus caused all the heavenly bodies to turn back on their paths. Thyestes
had no choice but to recognize Atreus’ greater claim.
So Atreus was king of Mycenae, and Thyestes was banished for his crimes. The
first thing Atreus did was drown Aerope for her sin, but still he stored the bitter
bile of vengeance in his heart. He pretended to forgive his brother, and invited
him back to Mycenae for a feast of reconciliation. And for the main dish of the
feast, he took and cut up Thyestes’ sons. The heavens darkened and the sun hid
its face at the crime, but Thyestes, all unknowing, ate heartily. At the end of the
meal, he sat back, satisfied, and asked to see his sons. Then Atreus uncovered a
serving-dish that held the boys’ hands and feet and heads, for their father to see.
Thyestes leapt to his feet, vomit spewing from his mouth, and kicked over the

table, crying out a curse: “May your house fall as surely as this table!”
Once more Thyestes left golden Mycenae, and went to dwell in Sicyon. Still
looking for ways to be avenged on his brother, he consulted an oracle, and was
told that he would father a child by his own daughter, Pelopia, and that the boy
would grow up to be the instrument of his vengeance. Thyestes was appalled—
he wanted revenge, but not like that—and he fled back to Sicyon; but on his way
he stumbled at night upon Athena’s sanctuary, where an all-female rite was
being conducted.
But Athena’s priestess soiled her robe with the blood of the sacrificial victim,
and left the sacred precinct to wash it in the nearby stream. She undressed not far
from where Thyestes was hiding. There was no moon, but in the starlight he
caught glimpses of the swell of a young breast and the shapely curve of a thigh,
until he was consumed by lust. He leapt out and raped the young woman in the
darkness. It was, of course, Pelopia, his own daughter, though neither of them
recognized the other in the dark and the frenzy of the moment.
When the child was born, Pelopia wanted nothing to do with it. She cast it away
from herself and ordered it to be left for wolves and carrion crows in the
mountains. But kindly shepherds found the baby and kept him alive with the
milk of their goats, and so he was called Aegisthus. And when the baby was
weaned, they took it to Atreus in Mycenae, and he raised the child as his own, as
blind to his fate as all mortals are.
The years passed, and Atreus’ sons, dour Agamemnon and red-haired Menelaus,
grew and flourished. So did their foster brother Aegisthus. But the feuding sons
of Pelops continued their bitter rivalry. Once more Atreus pretended to be
reconciled with Thyestes, and invited him to his hilltop palace at Mycenae. He
had filled the boys’ ears all their lives with tales of the wickedness of Thyestes,
and Aegisthus determined to kill the man he took to be his uncle, to repay Atreus
for raising him.
They met in a secluded place and Aegisthus drew his sword against his father—
the very sword that Pelopia had abandoned in disgust along with her unwanted
infant. But as he raised it in the air for the killing thrust, Thyestes cried out:
“That sword! It’s mine! I lost it years ago! Where did you find it?”
It was indeed the sword he had lost on the night of the rape. The awful truth
came out: Thyestes and Aegisthus recognized each other as father and son, and

came out: Thyestes and Aegisthus recognized each other as father and son, and
sent for Pelopia to learn the truth. But the news could hardly bring her joy or
relief from her long years of guilt and grief; she seized the sword and killed
herself with it. Aegisthus took the weapon, streaked black with his sistermother’s blood, to Atreus and showed it to him as proof that his brother was
dead, so that Atreus would lower his guard. And when the king went off alone to
perform a thanksgiving sacrifice, Aegisthus killed him and restored his father to
the throne of Mycenae. Agamemnon and Menelaus fled.
But even after all this slaughter the curse had not been drained of energy. Some
time later, Agamemnon and Menelaus succeeded in expelling Thyestes from
Mycenae for the last time, and he passes out of our knowing, for he lived out the
rest of his life in exile on the lonely island of Cythera, sacred to Aphrodite. And
Agamemnon ruled Mycenae wisely and well, while Menelaus was king of Sparta
—until the outbreak of the Trojan War.

The End of the Atreid Curse
The two sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus, were central to the Greek
war effort against Troy. In a sense, you could say Menelaus caused the war—
certainly there was grumbling from both officers and men along those lines—
and Agamemnon was the commander-in-chief of the Greek forces. For ten long
years the war was fought, and its outcome was uncertain until the very end. But
the Greeks did what they had to do to win, and then they came back home. Back
in Mycenae, Agamemnon was greeted by the full force of the family curse, now
working out its evil in his generation.
Agamemnon was married to Clytemestra. It was an illustrious union: the king of
Mycenae and the daughter of Tyndareos of Sparta and Leda. Her egg-born sister
was Helen, sometime wife of Menelaus, and her brothers were Castor and
Polydeuces, who would become the Heavenly Twins.
Now, as we shall see, Clytemestra could well claim that Agamemnon was guilty
of the death of their own daughter Iphigeneia. For all the years that Agamemnon
was away at war, her daughter’s fate poisoned Clytemestra’s mind and heart.
She had other children—Orestes, Electra, and Chrysothemis—but even by the
end of the war they had not reached maturity. And she took as her lover
Aegisthus, son of Thyestes and killer of her father-in-law, Atreus. Aegisthus had
long wooed her, but Agamemnon left behind a trusted bard to keep his wife from
harm.

When the time came for open rebellion against her husband, she had the bard
abducted and abandoned on an empty island, to perish of heat and thirst; and
then she went willingly to Aegisthus’ bed. It was a poor exchange, Agamemnon
for Aegisthus, but Clytemestra’s father Tyndareos had once forgotten to sacrifice
to Aphrodite, and the vengeful goddess filled his daughter’s heart with
infatuation. By the time Agamemnon arrived back in golden Mycenae,
Aegisthus’ and Clytemestra’s minds were made up. For seven years, they had
been living together as man and wife, and as king and queen, and their sinister
plans for the rightful king had long been laid. Clytemestra greeted him with
apparent affection, as a returning hero, and even though Cassandra foresaw what
was going to happen, why should she speak out? No one would believe her. For
Agamemnon had brought back, among other rich booty, the Trojan princess, the
truth-teller no one believed, now the king’s concubine.
Clytemestra led her husband into the palace, where, as a good wife would, she
had prepared a bath for him, to cleanse the dust of travel from his body; and
Agamemnon laid aside his weapons. Under the pretense of a romantic reunion
she sent the servants away; she would bathe the newly returned king with her
own hands.
For a moment she hesitated: he had become so toughened by ten years of
warfare that he seemed invulnerable, and somehow magnificent. But she
stiffened her resolve, and no sooner had he risen, dripping, from the relaxing
warmth of the water than Clytemestra entangled his limbs in a sheet, and trapped
him as effectively as a proud stag in a net. Aegisthus emerged from concealment
and together they stabbed him to death, rejoicing in the gouts of gore that soiled
their clothes and rapidly reddened the sweet water of the bath. And then they
slaughtered Cassandra too. Iphigeneia was avenged, and the black cloud of the
curse closed in on the palace of Mycenae.
Now, Orestes, the only male child, was away from Mycenae at the time. In fact,
it was Clytemestra herself who had sent him away, uncertain whether Aegisthus
might not think it in his interest to rid Mycenae of the last male Atreid. When he
heard of Aegisthus’ and Clytemestra’s coup, Orestes stayed away, and grew
safely to manhood in Phocis. He knew all along that he was bound to avenge the
murder of his father, even if that meant killing his mother, and Apollo himself,
through his oracle at Delphi, assured him that it was the right thing to do.

Orestes grew to manhood; aided by his sister Electra, he avenged Agamemnon’s
murder.[41]
In due course of time, Orestes returned secretly to Mycenae with his friend
Pylades, son of the king of Phocis, and, with the help and encouragement of
Electra (but to the horror of Chrysothemis), they killed both Clytemestra and
Aegisthus, hardening their hearts and calling on the ghost of Agamemnon to
witness the piety of their awful deed. And so the dream came true that had
appeared to Clytemestra when she was pregnant with Orestes: that she suckled a
snake, which drew blood as well as milk from her breast.
But the horrible Furies pursue anyone who commits murder within the family,
and they harried Orestes, until the guilt gnawing at his mind drove him quite

and they harried Orestes, until the guilt gnawing at his mind drove him quite
insane. During one of his lucid moments, he begged Electra to take him to
Delphi. Apollo assured him that he would be cured, and sent him for trial at
Athens, where Athena herself held court. And the wise goddess freed him of
guilt and ordered the Furies to plague Orestes no more. She is a great goddess,
whose vision pierces veils, and the power of her word ended the curse that had
afflicted the family for four generations and caused the worst crimes known to
man.

Chapter Seven
ATHENS IN THE AGE OF HEROES
The First Athenian King
At Athens the bards sing of their first kings, but no one now knows all their
names or stories. The earliest kings of whom we know something were these
five: Cecrops, Erichthonius, Pandion, Erechtheus, and Aegeus, who was the
father of Theseus.
Cecrops is remembered as the original founder of Athens. In his time, a dispute
arose between Poseidon and Athena as to which of them should be the guardian
of the city. Mighty Poseidon took up the challenge and struck the solid rock of
the Acropolis with his trident, and a fresh-water spring burst forth, a great boon
for the city. But Athena caused the first olive tree to sprout, and the olive is the
foundation of Athenian prosperity. The prize was hers, and in her honor the city
came to be called Athens, though the earth-shaker too is held in high esteem
there.
Like Cecrops and all the early Athenian kings, Erichthonius was born from the
earth and the lower half of his body was serpentine. He was born, as we have
seen, when Hephaestus, lusting after Athena, spilled his seed on the receptive
ground. Athena, however, gathered up the strange infant and kept him safe in a
chest, and set a guard of two snakes over the baby, which coiled their lengths
around his infant limbs. Athena gave the chest to the dew-bright daughters of
Cecrops for safekeeping, and warned the young women—Aglauros, Herse, and
Pandrosus—not to look inside. But curiosity got the better of them, and after one
glance they became deranged and threw themselves off the Acropolis to their
deaths. After this, Athena brought Erichthonius up herself, until he was ready to
take up his kingdom.

The three daughters of Cecrops disobeyed Athena and opened the box
containing baby Erichthonius.[42]
Pandion, who succeeded Erichthonius as king, had two daughters, Procne and
Philomela. Procne was married to Tereus, king of Thrace, and lived there with
him, and bore him a son, Itys. But when Philomela, her beloved sister, came to
visit, Tereus violated her and, to make sure she wouldn’t tell anyone, cut out her
tongue and locked her away in a hovel deep in a gloomy forest, telling Procne
that her sister had unexpectedly fled. For it was fated that he should die at the
hands of close kin, and Tereus had already killed his brother out of fear. But
Philomela was undefeated: she wove the story into a tapestry and, using sign
language, told the servant who attended her to take the work to her sister. Procne
understood the tale spun by her sister’s loom, but patiently bided her time.

understood the tale spun by her sister’s loom, but patiently bided her time.
The time came for the women of Thrace to celebrate the mysteries of Dionysus
in the countryside, away from the restricting conventions of populated places.
Procne seized the opportunity to rescue her sister from the forest, and she
brought her back to the palace and hid her in her quarters. The two sisters plotted
ghastly revenge: they killed young Itys, cooked him, and gave him to Tereus to
eat. Too late Tereus realized what meat had been laid before him, and in a
murderous frenzy he chased the women through the palace.
But the gods intervened and transformed them into birds to escape him. Procne
became the nightingale, and ever mourns her dead son at night; while the
swallow Philomela, trying to tell of her sorrow with her tongueless beak,
succeeds only in producing an incoherent gurgle. Tereus, however, with his
high-crested helmet and his sword, became a hoopoe.
Pandion, as we have seen, the devotee of Dionysus, was killed by drunken
peasants. The fate of Erechtheus, Pandion’s son and heir, was scarcely better. In
his time, baneful war first came to Athena’s city, wielded by Eumolpus, son of
Poseidon and king of Eleusis. And the gods told Erechtheus that the city would
fall, unless he sacrificed one of his daughters. Erechtheus and his wife, crushed
by the terrible burden of their duty, gave their consent, so that the Furies would
have no pretext for persecuting them. In the ensuing battle, Erechtheus himself
killed Eumolpus, but for his pains was killed in his turn by Poseidon, who
cracked open a chasm in the earth with his trident and hurled him inside. From
the earth came this half-snake king, and to the earth he returned.
Erechtheus had three other daughters of whom stories are told. Oreithyia was
loved by Boreas, but his suit was rejected: Erechtheus had no desire to ally
himself and his city with the cold north wind. But Boreas was true to his violent
nature. He found the fair maiden gathering flowers on the banks of the Cephisus,
and whisked her away to his mountain fastness in Thrace, for all that her sisters
tried to hold her back. There she bore him Zetes and Calaïs, sons who did justice
to the noble lineages of both their parents: as Argonauts, they drove off the
Snatchers, and, at the funeral games of Pelias, they were the celebrated winners
of the long footrace.
Another daughter, the bewitching Procris, was wedded to Cephalus, the son of
Herse by Hermes, and they loved each other so truly that they swore never to
have sex with anyone else. But saffron-robed Eos, the dawn’s faery twilight, was
in love with Cephalus, and persuaded him to test his wife’s fidelity. “I would not

in love with Cephalus, and persuaded him to test his wife’s fidelity. “I would not
have you break your vow to your wife,” she said, “unless she breaks hers first.”
And she disguised Cephalus as a stranger, burdened him with precious gifts, and
sent him to seduce his own wife.
Each day he increased his offer to her, and each day she faithfully refused to lie
with him. But his stupid persistence was duly paid. When she eventually gave in
to the “stranger,” he revealed himself, and in shame she ran away to Crete, to the
court of King Minos. And Minos too fell in love with the enchanting young
woman. But Minos had been cursed by his wife Pasiphae, so that whenever he
had sex he would emit foul little snakes and tiny scorpions. Procris cured him,
however, and in return he gave her gifts that Artemis had given him: a javelin
that never missed its mark and flew back to the thrower’s hand, and a hound that
always caught its quarry.
With the hound at her heels, and the javelin in hand, Procris returned to Athens
disguised as a young nobleman, a fanatical hunter. She and her husband became
friends, and spent many days together in the mountains, searching for game.
Naturally, Cephalus began to covet the remarkable hound and the incredible
javelin. Daily he offered more wealth in exchange for them, and each time
Procris refused to trade. But at last she said, “Give me what’s between your
legs!” Cephalus was somewhat taken aback by his friend’s suggestion, but his
longing for the hound and the javelin was such that he would do anything.
In the bed chamber all was revealed, and husband and wife were reconciled. But
secret distrust was still rotting the foundation of their marriage. Cephalus used to
go out hunting with his lady’s infallible javelin, and after the heat of the chase he
would lie down and beg any clouds in the sky to hurry his way, to give him
shade. But an attendant took him to be calling for a woman called Nephele—the
name means “cloud”—and confided his suspicions to Procris. The next time
Cephalus went out hunting, she secretly followed him, and hid close by in the
bushes while he took his rest. But a twig-snap alerted the keen hunter to the
presence of an animal, or so he thought. Without a moment’s hesitation he
hurled the unerring javelin at the bush, and the javelin, which pierced the heart
of its target, returned with bloodied head to Cephalus’ hand.
Cephalus banished himself from Athens for the slaying of his wife and went to
live in Thebes for the period of purification. When he arrived there, with his
hound, he found that the Thebans were being harassed by a fearsome man-eating
fox, too crafty and too fast for any of their hounds to catch. “Watch this!” said

fox, too crafty and too fast for any of their hounds to catch. “Watch this!” said
Cephalus. But the magical fox could not be caught. Round and round they went,
the hound endlessly closing in on the endlessly elusive fox … As we shall see, it
took Zeus to resolve the stalemate, and he did so in order to enable his favorite
son Heracles to be born.
Another daughter of Erechtheus was Creusa, who was ravished and abandoned
by Apollo, but bore him a son, Ion. Not wanting her father to know that she had
a child out of wedlock, she left Ion to die in a remote cave, but Apollo cared for
his son, and sent Hermes to rescue him and take him as a foundling to Delphi,
where he worked in the holy precinct as a humble servant. Years later, Creusa
and her husband Xuthus, son of Hellen, came to Delphi to inquire about their
childlessness, and Xuthus was told by the god to take as his son the first person
he met as he left the temple. And so Ion returned to Athens and became the
revered ancestor of Ionian-speaking Greeks.

The Labors of Theseus
Next among the legendary kings of Athens was Aegeus. He and his wife had as
yet no heir for the kingdom, so he went, as is usual, to the sanctuary of Apollo at
Delphi, to ask whether he would have children, and what he should do about it.
The oracle’s reply was oblique and puzzling: “Leave the wineskin’s mouth
unopened until you get home.”
On the way back from Delphi to Athens Aegeus stayed for a while with Pittheus,
king of Troezen. At an evening’s banquet Aegeus shared with his friend the
confusing message he’d received from the god. Pittheus thought for a while, and
then ordered his servants to see that every wine cup remained full, especially that
of his noble guest. And once Aegeus was good and drunk, he bedded him down
with his own daughter Aethra. But on the same night that Aethra lay with
Aegeus, she lay also with the god Poseidon, and so her child was the son of both
the earth-shaker and the king of Athens.
Before leaving Troezen, Aegeus instructed Aethra that, if she bore a male child,
she was to bring him up without telling anyone who the father was, and send him
to Athens when he was able to raise a certain rock by himself. Under the rock
Aegeus had hidden a pair of sandals and an ivory-hilted sword, as tokens by
which he would be able to recognize his son. In due course of time Theseus was
born, and the birds fell silent in awe at his birth.
The years passed, and red-haired Theseus grew to young manhood, skilled in the

The years passed, and red-haired Theseus grew to young manhood, skilled in the
ways of battle and council chamber. One day he was out hunting in the hills near
Troezen, and he thought that a hare he was chasing had taken refuge under a
boulder. With some effort, he managed to lift up the boulder—only to find no
hare, but, mysteriously, a valuable sword and a pair of sandals. He replaced the
heavy stone and went quickly to fetch his mother, to show her the cache. Aethra
realized that the time had come for her son to go to his father in Athens. So with
the sword at his side and the sandals strapped to his feet, Theseus set off to meet
his destiny.

Theseus and Aethra recovered the sword and sandals left by Aegeus.[43]
To reach Athens, Theseus was bound to take the dangerous coast road around
the Saronic Gulf. This untamed territory was infested with unscrupulous killers
and robbers, who rejected the sacred laws of hospitality toward strangers. This
would be an epic journey for the young man, and a test of his mettle as a hero
and a future king. First, near Epidaurus, he was set upon by the Man with the

and a future king. First, near Epidaurus, he was set upon by the Man with the
Club, as the beetle-browed brigand Periphetes was called. One blow from the
club of this hulking son of Hephaestus was enough to send all those he
encountered to the dank halls of Hades, lord of shades. But Theseus dodged the
blow, seized the club—and found that one blow from him was enough to crush
Periphetes’ skull as well. Then he continued on his way.
The region around the Isthmus was under the sway of Sinis, a son of Poseidon.
Gigantic and terrible, he had devised an appalling death for anyone he caught on
the road. He would bend down two young pine trees until their tops were close
together, tie his captive’s ankles to one tree and his wrists to the other—and then
let the saplings spring upright, ripping his victim limb from limb. Theseus gave
the Pinebender a taste of his own deadly medicine.
Just west of Megara, in the district of Crommyon, an enormous, man-eating sow,
said to be under the control of a witch, was terrorizing the inhabitants. No one
dared leave home to work the fields or attend a ceremony at a temple, for fear of
becoming the bristling monster’s next meal. Theseus fearlessly hunted the sow
down in the low hills and killed it—and as it died, the aged crone who was its
keeper faded away to nothingness.
The domain of monstrous Sciron lay a little further on, between Megara and
Eleusis. The cliffs here soar high and sheer from the sea, and the road clings
tentatively to the precipice. Sciron had the habit of blocking the narrow way and
forcing passersby to kneel and wash his feet in a basin of water. As if the
humiliation wasn’t enough, while they were crouching down he dealt them a
mighty kick that sent them tumbling down the cliff and into the sea below,
where a giant turtle ate them. Theseus saw through Sciron’s foul ruse and played
the victim, but as he bent down he seized hold of the man’s legs. He flipped him
over his shoulders and into the churning sea hundreds of feet below, where the
hungry turtle was waiting.
Just beyond Eleusis lived a brigand called Cercyron, a son of Hephaestus. His
favorite pastime was to compel travelers to wrestle with him. He claimed falsely
that those who beat him were allowed to continue on their way—but in fact none
could defeat him, and he fought them to the death. Theseus was the first to outwrestle him. He picked the huge highwayman up off the ground, held him aloft
for a moment, and smashed his body down onto the ground, which bristled with
sharp rocks.

Finally, Theseus had to pass crazy Procrustes, whose name means the Stretcher.
Not far from Athens, Procrustes had blocked the road with a bed upon which he
compelled all travelers to lie. If they were too long for the bed, he took up his ax
and chopped them down to size; if they were too short, he took up a mallet,
made for him in Hephaestus’ workshop by the Cyclopes, and flattened them into
a perfect fit. But Theseus, taking Procrustes’ measure, grabbed the lunatic and
pinned him on the bed. It was the killer’s turn to die; Theseus hacked off bits of
him until he was just the right size.

On the journey to Athens, Theseus purged the land of lawless brigands and
monsters.[44]
Having cleared the coast path of its many dangers, Theseus arrived in Athens
and presented himself, as Aethra had suggested, at the royal palace. But it so
happened that Aegeus was away at the time, negotiating with potential allies for
the forthcoming war with Crete. The young hero was greeted by Medea, who
had fled from Corinth to Athens after ruining Jason’s life and killing their
children, and was now married to King Aegeus. The sorceress recognized the
young man as Aegeus’ son, and realized what a threat he was to her own son.
Medus would never inherit the Athenian throne with Theseus around. So she
sent Theseus off to certain death on the coastal plain of Marathon.

The fields and low hills of Marathon, north-east of Athens, were being terrorized
by an enormous bull. This was the same bull that led to the ruin of Cretan Minos
… but we shall have that story soon enough. Many men had fallen beneath the
savage hoofs and deadly horns in their failed attempts to subdue the beast. But
Theseus wrestled the bull to the ground and hobbled it, and drove it in triumph
back to Athens, where he sacrificed it to Apollo. Aegeus was back in Athens by
then, and held a banquet to celebrate the capture of the bull. But he hadn’t
recognized his son yet, and Medea advised him to do away with this mysterious
stranger, lest he try to take the throne. “If you agree,” she said, “I’ll provide you
with some wolf’s bane right now, and you can put it in his wine.” But when
Theseus lifted his cup to acknowledge his hosts before drinking, his cloak fell
away from his shoulder, and Aegeus glimpsed the ivory hilt of his sword. He
dashed the poisoned chalice away from Theseus’ hand and, to Medea’s chagrin,
amid tears of joy Aegeus publicly recognized Theseus as his son and heir.

Theseus and the Minotaur
Theseus and Aegeus were together at last, and they spent their days getting to
know each other during a brief time of peace. But before long Athens was
attacked by King Minos of Crete, one of the sons Europa had borne for Zeus.
Prior to Theseus’ arrival, Minos’ son Androgeos had paid a visit to Athens, and
had mightily impressed everyone with his athletic prowess. But Aegeus
suspected that Androgeos had secret dealings with Pallas, Aegeus’ ambitious
brother, who sought the Athenian throne for himself and his sons. The Athenian
king had therefore sent Androgeos off to test his strength against the
Marathonian bull, and the bull had, as expected, gored and trampled the young
man to death. In retaliation, grief-stricken Minos launched an invasion.
He landed first at Megara, where Aegeus’ other brother Nisus was king. Now,
Nisus had a bright lock of immortal hair growing on his head, and as long as it
was there Megara would be safe. But his daughter Scylla had offended queenly
Hera, and in retaliation the cow-eyed goddess sent Eros to make the girl fall in
love with her enemy. As Scylla looked out from the walls of the town, her eyes
fell on Minos, and Eros’ arrow pierced her heart. A trusted servant delivered her
message to the Cretan king, and he sent her in return a false token of his love, a
many-stranded necklace of weighty gold. Knowing what she had to do to win
her man, she cut off her father’s magic lock while he slept and sent it to her
purported lover. But Minos ruthlessly rejected her, sacked the city, killed Nisus,
and then sailed off for Athens.

It didn’t take Minos long to subdue Athens, and, as recompense for the murder
of his dear son, he imposed a heavy penalty on the city. Every year, seven noble
youths and seven noble maidens were to be chosen by lot and sent to Minos’
palace in Cnossus. Once there, they were to enter the amazing labyrinth that
Daedalus had built under the palace. At its heart lived the fearsome Minotaur;
none who entered the labyrinth ever returned.
*
What was the Minotaur? A horrid hybrid, with the legs and body of a man, but
the shoulders and massive head of a bull. It was, indirectly, a member of Minos’
family. In order to help Minos carry out his obligatory annual sacrifice to
Poseidon, the sea-god himself had sent him a bull from the sea—all white,
flawless, and massive. So perfect was the bull that it seemed to Minos a waste to
do away with it, and in his folly he selected a less perfect sacrifice for the earthshaker’s altar.
This had angered Poseidon, and he cursed Minos’ wife Pasiphae, daughter of the
sun, with a perverse lust for the gorgeous bull. She called on the skilled
craftsman Daedalus to find a way to allow her to couple with the creature, and he
constructed a hollow cow of wood. He covered the frame with hide to fool the
bull, and Pasiphae squirmed herself into position inside the dummy cow. Soon
the handsome bull came and fulfilled her twisted fantasy. The result was the
Minotaur.

Daedalus’ invention allowed Pasiphae to fulfill her god-induced lust for
Poseidon’s bull.[45]
Minos was so disgusted and ashamed of his wife’s behavior and the offspring of
her foul union that he had Daedalus construct an elaborate labyrinth under the
palace, and the mazy multitude of winding ways was so confusing that even its
maker was hard put to find his way around it. And at the heart of the maze lived
the Minotaur, chained and hungry, raging in its squalor.
The ingenious Daedalus was a cousin of Aegeus, from a minor branch of the
Athenian royal family, but he had fled Athens after killing a nephew, and had
fetched up in Crete, along with his son Icarus. Endowed by the gods with a
clever mind and hands to match, he was the most skilled inventor and craftsman

clever mind and hands to match, he was the most skilled inventor and craftsman
of this or any other age. The statues he sculpted were so lifelike that you would
swear they breathed and moved; he built temples and altars, and he invented all
the basic tools of carpentry and building to help him and his successors in their
work. For his part in helping Pasiphae to consummate her obscene lust, Minos
imprisoned Daedalus and his son. But the prison walls had not been built that
could contain the master. “Minos may control the land,” said Daedalus to Icarus,
“and he may control the seaways; but the sky is beyond his reach.”
Within his cell, Daedalus fashioned for himself and his son strong wings. Great
eagle feathers covered a light wooden frame, which could be strapped to the
arms. The feathers were coated with wax, both to glue them to the frame and to
make them strong enough to bear the weight of a human being. When all was
ready, the two of them, man and boy, perched on the window ledge of their lofty
prison and launched themselves into the air.
Daedalus’ latest invention was astounding: human beings could fly! As they
began to flap and glide their easy way toward Sicily, Daedalus warned Icarus to
steer a middle course. “The peril stands equal, my son,” he said. “If you fly too
low, the hungry waves may lick up and drown you; but if you fly too high, the
sun may melt the wax which binds your wings together. Fly not too high, my
son!”
Again and again the anxious father had to warn his son about the danger, and
every time Icarus obeyed at first, but soon began to experiment, as teenagers
will, with the limits of his father’s marvelous invention. He swooped and soared
to his heart’s delight, and Daedalus was pleased to see that the wings were
sturdy enough to stand this much stress. But in such hazardous ventures, one
mistake is all that is needed. Icarus rose too high in the sky, preparing for a
joyous dive. The wax melted, the feathers fell off, and the boy plummeted
headlong to his death in the sea.

When Icarus flew too high the waxen wings melted and he plummeted to his
death.[46]
But Daedalus was revenged on Minos. Shortly after the time of our story, Minos
went to Sicily to recover Daedalus and punish him. Daedalus went into hiding,
but Minos cunningly took with him to Sicily a conch shell, and he offered a
princely reward to anyone who could pass a thread all the way through the
windings of the shell.
Now, the only one who could do it was Cocalus, king of Acragas, and the way
he did it was to tie the thread to an ant, which then worked its way through the
tortuous channels of the shell. But this was a trap: Minos knew that only
Daedalus could have thought up the business with the ant, and so he knew that
the fugitive prince was in Acragas. When Minos confronted Cocalus, the king
greeted him kindly, and suggested a bath to wash the dust of his journey from his
royal body, with his own fair daughters in attendance. And when Minos stepped
into the bath, Cocalus had his daughters pour boiling water over the Cretan king,
who died in horrible agony.

who died in horrible agony.
*
At the time in question, Minos defeated the Athenians and imposed the
indemnity of the seven youths and seven maidens, to be sent into the labyrinth as
a sacrifice to the Minotaur. Young Theseus was grieved to see his new-found
father humbled so, and was enraged by the city’s loss. The people of the
kingdom were assembled, and fourteen names were read out amid the cries and
wails of heartbroken parents and siblings. But while all the other young men and
women had been chosen by lot, Minos chose Theseus himself, for he wanted
Aegeus to suffer the loss of his newly discovered son. But Theseus was glad to
go, for he intended to do away with the Minotaur and rid Athens once and for all
of the indemnity.
The fourteen victims were hustled onto the black-sailed flagship of Minos’
victorious war fleet and set sail on a favorable breeze. In the course of the
voyage, Minos began to lust after one of the young Athenian women, but
Theseus stood up to him and protected the terrified virgin. “And who are you,”
thundered Minos, “to prevent a son of Zeus from having his way?” “A son of
Poseidon,” Theseus snapped back, and challenged Minos to prove that Zeus
really was his father. “I will if you will,” said Minos, and he called upon Zeus to
send thunder, as a sign that he recognized him as his son. A massive peal of
thunder rumbled and shook the heavens, and then Minos hurled a ring into the
depths of the sea, challenging Theseus to recover it, if he truly was the son of
Poseidon.
Nothing daunted, Theseus leapt into the foaming waves; for heroes recognize no
limits. None expected to see him again, but dolphins came and bore him to the
undersea palace of his father Poseidon, where the brother of almighty Zeus sat
on his throne with Amphitrite at his right hand. Amphitrite presented her stepson
with Minos’ ring, and gave him a beautiful cloak and a crown that Aphrodite had
once given her. And Theseus, endowed thereby with the aura of Aphrodite, was
escorted back to Minos’ ship by Poseidon’s assistant Triton, whose massive,
scaly bulk belied his gentle nature. Theseus clambered back on board,
miraculously dry. If Minos was concerned, he kept his fears to himself. No
sooner had the ships docked at the harbor of Cnossus than Ariadne, the Cretan
king’s beautiful daughter, hurried down to greet her father. But as soon as she
cast eyes on Theseus, standing tall and proud on the prow of the flagship, she
fell in love with him. Ariadne crept out after dark and whispered her love to

Theseus through the barred window of the rough quarters shared by the young
Athenian captives. The hero eagerly returned her words, for she was
surpassingly fair—and potentially useful.
Theseus’ greatest problem was this. Even though he was unarmed, he was
confident that he could kill the Minotaur—after all, nothing had been able to
resist him so far—but first he had to find it. The maze was famously complex,
designed to baffle the human mind and heart. A man could get lost in there
forever, and wander futilely and in increasing terror until death overtook him. So
when the time came for him and the other young Athenians to enter the labyrinth
and confront the Minotaur, Ariadne secretly slipped him a spool of shining
thread, which he could unwind as he worked his way through the maze, and
rewind on the way back.
The fourteen young men and women stepped into the gloom of the labyrinth, but
their sinking hearts recovered when they saw the confidence of their champion’s
stride. He led the way, and they crept through the maze behind him. Time and
again they found that they had come to a dead end, so they rewound the thread
back to the last junction and tried a different route. At last, by eliminating all the
dead ends, they drew closer and closer to the center, until they could hear the
snuffling and stamping of the monster and let the noise pull them fearfully
forward in the gloom. The closer they came, the worse the stench that assailed
their nostrils—the miasma of the Minotaur’s rotting victims and waste.
As soon as the beast caught their scent, it raised its muzzle and blasted the stale
air with hot breath, that issued like a wet cloud from its red-rimmed nostrils. It
began to tug at the leg-irons that chained it to the solid rock and prevented
escape to the world above. When the beast caught sight of them, it seized some
of the massive boulders that were lying about the floor of the cavern and began
to hurl them at the terrified youngsters. But Theseus told the rest to stay well
behind, while he boldly advanced and fought the creature singlehandedly, man
against monster. Before long the Minotaur was gasping out its final breaths in a
pool of blood on the rocky ground, battered by the same rocks it had hurled at
Theseus.
It was a simple matter to escape the foul dankness of the labyrinth: all they had
to do was follow Ariadne’s thread back to the entrance, where she anxiously
awaited them. Gulping sweet life into their lungs along with the clean, bright air,
they sprinted for the harbor. After scuttling all the rest of Minos’ ships to prevent
pursuit, they leapt aboard the black-winged flagship in which they had come,

pursuit, they leapt aboard the black-winged flagship in which they had come,
and set sail safely for Athens. Everyone had reason for joy, and Ariadne
anticipated soon being Theseus’ royal bride.

“Theseus boldly advanced and fought the creature singlehandedly, man against
monster.”[47]
The fugitives spent the first night on the island of Naxos. But Athena appeared
to Theseus in a dream, and commanded him to continue his voyage immediately,
and to leave Ariadne there on the island. For she was destined for a higher
station. Theseus did so, but reluctantly, with a last lingering look at the fair
maiden; but the orders of the gods are not to be disobeyed. When Ariadne awoke
in the morning, she was frightened and bewildered, but the god Dionysus
appeared before her and said that she was destined to be his wife, and promised
her fidelity. And Father Zeus made her immortal, so that she would never know
death or age, and could live for all eternity with her husband. The veil between
mortality and immortality is fine, but so strong that only Father Zeus, king of
gods and men, can part it for an instant.

So the young Athenians continued their voyage home. Now, on the day Minos
took him and the others from Athens to become fare for the Minotaur, Theseus
had promised his father that, if he managed to destroy the beast and return, he
would hoist white sails on the ship, to replace the morbid black ones which had
carried him away on his deadly mission. But caught up in the joy and
anticipation of a victorious homecoming, Theseus forgot to change the sails. Day
after day, Aegeus had climbed to the highest point of the Athenian Acropolis to
keep an anxious but hopeful vigil and watch for the sign of his son’s safe return.
And at last he saw the ship on the horizon—but black sails, not white, snapped
in the wind.
His son was dead; he had no reason to go on living. Aegeus cast himself to his
death off the Acropolis. But others say that he saw the black sails from the cliffs
of Sunium, and there threw himself into the sea which now bears his name, the
Aegean.

King Theseus
By this unhappy accident, Theseus gained the throne of Athens, but it was not a
smooth succession. Aegeus had long been feuding with his brother Pallas, and
now Pallas gathered a mighty force to seize the throne. With his sons as his
generals, he prepared to attack Athens. But Theseus got wind of his plans,
launched a surprise counterattack, and eliminated the threat once and for all. So
Theseus protected his people, and they prospered under his wisdom.
Theseus’ best friend was Pirithous, king of the Lapiths in Thessaly. Pirithous
was a son of Ixion, and also of Zeus, who had mounted Ixion’s wife in the form
of a noble stallion. Pirithous and Theseus became friends when the Thessalian
tried to rustle some of Theseus’ cattle. Theseus set out in pursuit and caught up
with the thief—but Pirithous turned and offered him friendship instead of
enmity. From then on the two were inseparable, and shared a number of
adventures. Usually, but not always, their concern was to tame the earth, to make
it a place where human civilization and culture could flourish.
Together they led an expedition against the Amazons, who dwell in distant
Scythia, on the edge of the world, and they abducted the Amazon queen Antiope,
who bore Theseus a son, Hippolytus. But then Theseus cast Antiope aside and
chose Phaedra, daughter of Cretan Minos, to be his lawful wife. No one treats a
proud Amazon queen like that and gets away with it! Antiope summoned her
sisters and they attacked Athens in force; but the Amazons were repulsed, and

sisters and they attacked Athens in force; but the Amazons were repulsed, and
Antiope died from her wounds.

Artemis, the divine huntress, with the tools of her craft.[48]
Hippolytus grew up fair and strong in his father’s halls, and became a devotee of
Artemis. He loved nothing better than running with hounds and other hunters,
bare-chested and sweat-soaked in the hills; and he swore that he would remain
chaste all his life, in imitation of his goddess. But Phaedra’s heart was filled with
an abominable love for her stepson, and then, when he refused her, with cold
fury. She went to Theseus and told him that Hippolytus had tried to rape her.
Theseus called on his father Poseidon to destroy Hippolytus, and a bull emerged
from the surf of the sea and attacked the young man as he was driving his
chariot. The horses bolted and Hippolytus was dragged along the ground to his

death. At the sight of his mangled body, Phaedra killed herself for shame—but
Hippolytus was miraculously resurrected by Asclepius, and for this unnatural act
Asclepius was blasted by Zeus the cloud-gatherer.

Poseidon called forth a bull from the sea to destroy Hippolytus, in answer to
Theseus’ misguided prayer.[49]
Now, Pirithous was betrothed to Hippodamia, daughter of Atrax of Hestiaeotis,
and the time came for the wedding to be celebrated. Pirithous arranged a
splendid wedding feast, and invited not only all his fellow Lapiths, but his
distant kin the Centaurs as well, who dwelled nearby in the mountains of
Thessaly. The servants, obeying orders, served the shaggy Centaurs milk to
drink; but the tempting scent of the sweet wine the Lapiths were drinking
inflamed the wild half-men, and they pushed their milk aside and seized flagons
of wine instead.
At first, the Centaurs became boisterous, then unruly, and finally they tried to
rape the Lapith women. Tables were overturned, women were being dragged off
by the hair. Their screams mingled with the confused cries of the Lapiths and
grunts of the Centaurs as they hauled their reluctant victims away. The Lapiths
armed themselves with whatever they could grab—cups, cushions, knives—
while the Centaurs wielded trees that they uprooted, and boulders that they
snatched up in their powerful arms.

snatched up in their powerful arms.

The Lapith wedding feast descended into chaos after the Centaurs’ drunkenness
ignited violence.[50]
The conflict that broke out at the wedding spilled out of the house and became
more formal warfare, to be resolved by battle only when Theseus came to help.
In the course of the fighting many heroes fell, including the noble Lapith
Caeneus, the brother of Hippodamia. He had been born as Caenis, a girl, but she
granted her favors to Poseidon, who in return granted her a wish. And her wish
was to become a man, and immortal. But despite his immortality, the Centaurs
hammered Caeneus into the ground with tree trunks, and sealed him inside
forever with a massive boulder.
Even the noblest heroes can act like fools under the influence of Eros. The most
notorious escapade which Theseus and Pirithous got up to involved two bungled
abductions. The young men set their hearts on making daughters of Zeus their
own. Theseus chose Helen, daughter of Zeus and Leda, while Pirithous aimed
even higher, for Persephone, wife of Hades. They succeeded in abducting Helen
from Sparta—she was just a young girl at the time, and they found her dancing
naked by the Eurotas river with her friends—but Theseus left her in Athens and
immediately set out to help his friend with Persephone. Helen’s brothers, the

divine twins Castor and Polydeuces, took advantage of his absence to regain
their sister—and at the same time they kidnapped Aethra, Theseus’ mother, to be
Helen’s handmaid.
Pirithous’ attempt on Persephone was even more of a disaster, though he
foolishly entertained the idea that, since he and Persephone shared Zeus as their
father, the cloud-gatherer would look kindly on the endeavor. When they arrived
in Hades’ palace, the dark-cowled god made them welcome, but his heart spoke
other words, for he knew their designs. And so he bade them be seated—but as
soon as Pirithous took his seat on an intricately carved bench, the stone softened
and molded itself around him, and then hardened again, so that he was utterly
trapped. Theseus’ help was as vain as Pirithous’ struggle. The Athenian king was
compelled to leave his friend forever in the underworld, as one of the dead,
condemned to an eternity of grief and remorse.
Back in Athens, his adventures over, Theseus proved to be a wise and good king
—but such qualities do not make one immune from treachery. By such means
his cousin Menestheus usurped the throne of Athens and banished Theseus to the
island of Scyros, where in due course he died. His body was found broken at the
bottom of a cliff, and no one knew whether he had fallen or been pushed.

Chapter Eight
HERACLES
The Birth of Heracles
Electryon, king of Mycenae and son of Perseus and Andromeda, went to war
with the Teleboans, who had killed his sons and stolen his cattle. While he was
away, he left Amphitryon in charge of Mycenae, and signaled his trust in his
young nephew by giving him his daughter Alcmene, who was so beautiful that
men thought they were in the presence of Aphrodite herself, the subduer of men.
But Electryon told Amphitryon that he was to leave Alcmene a virgin until after
he returned from his expedition, and Alcmene agreed: no sex until her dead
brothers had been avenged.
But a terrible accident occurred. Electryon found the missing cattle before he
had avenged himself on the Teleboans. He sent for Amphitryon and together
they began to drive the herd back to Mycenae. But during the drive one of the
cows ran amok. Amphitryon hurled his club at the creature’s head, but it
bounced off the horns and struck Electryon instead, killing him instantly. When
Amphitryon got back to Mycenae, the priests told him he had to leave, in case
his blood-guilt polluted the city, and he chose to go to Thebes.
So Amphitryon went to Thebes for purification, taking his wife with him. But
Alcmene still refused to let Amphitryon into her bed until her brothers had been
avenged. A homeless exile, Amphitryon was not up to the task alone: he needed
the help of his host, Creon of Thebes. But Creon was preoccupied by a deadly
fox that was devastating the countryside. Each month one young man was sent
out after the fox, and was never seen again. To make matters worse, everyone
knew that the fox was destined never to be caught. Creon promised help, but
only once the fox had been dealt with.
Just then, Cephalus arrived in Thebes. The Athenian needed purification from
blood guilt as well, after accidentally killing his wife with his infallible javelin.
Tainted by its deadly deed, the javelin had been left behind, a dedication in a
temple, but Cephalus still had his hound. They set out after the fox—the
infallible hound against the fox that could not be caught. An impossible situation
developed, a paradox: the hound was bound to catch the fox, but the fox could
not be caught. But Father Zeus grew bored of watching the endless chase. He
resolved the riddle by turning both fox and hound to stone, and they stand there

resolved the riddle by turning both fox and hound to stone, and they stand there
still.
Creon was now free to help Amphitryon and together they marched out against
the Teleboans. The chief problem was that the Teleboans could not be conquered
as long as their king, Pterelaus, was alive, and he could not be killed. He sported
a magical lock of golden hair which kept him alive. But it didn’t require Zeus to
solve this riddle. Pterelaus’ daughter fell in love with Amphitryon and betrayed
her father. She cut off the golden lock and he immediately died. The city fell,
and Amphitryon punished the Teleboans for killing Alcmene’s brothers.
When Amphitryon returned victorious to Thebes, he was at last allowed to lie
with his wife, but there was something he didn’t know. Alcmene had just been
honored by a long and fulfilling visit from Zeus. The great god had appeared to
her as Amphitryon and slept with her, before revealing himself to her and giving
her a golden goblet as a gift. Not only had he slept with her, but he had
persuaded Helios, the sun-god, to rein in his stallions so that the sun would not
rise in the morning, and the night would be prolonged to three times its normal
length. So much potency did Zeus want to sow in fair Alcmene.

Helios held back his shining team and chariot to prolong Zeus’ night of love
with Alcmene.[51]
Now, Zeus’ nocturnal visit took place on the same night as Amphitryon’s return,
and Amphitryon too slept with his wife. In due course of time, then, Alcmene
bore twins: Heracles and Iphicles, begotten respectively by Zeus and
Amphitryon. It was a hard birth, but Hera, the goddess of childbirth, showed no
pity. Zeus, knowing that his son was due to be born, announced that whoever
was born on that day should rule all those around him. Hera saw an opportunity:
“Do you swear to that?” she said. “Whoever is born today shall rule his
neighbors?” And Zeus, failing to perceive his wife’s trick, nodded his head in
solemn assent.

Straight away, Hera left Olympus for earth. She did two things. First, she
delayed Heracles’ birth, but accelerated that of his cousin, Eurystheus of Tiryns,
so that Eurystheus should rule Heracles and not the other way around. And so it
turned out. Second, furious with Zeus for yet another affair, no sooner had
Heracles been born than she sent two slithering vipers into Alcmene’s chamber,
intending their poisonous fangs to make short work of her husband’s bastard
baby. But the mighty infant grasped a snake in each of his chubby hands and
squeezed them to death.
Alcmene was frightened now, and dared not suckle the baby in case she aroused
Hera’s wrath. She took the baby out of the palace and abandoned it in the
maquis, most likely to die. But Zeus sent Hermes to bring the infant secretly to
Olympus and ensure that he sucked at the breast of Hera herself, so that, despite
being mortal, Heracles should attain godhood. But the baby bit the great
goddess’s nipple and she thrust him away in pain, and Hermes brought the baby
back to Alcmene and persuaded her to raise him herself. “Be of good cheer,” he
reassured her. “Your child shall know greatness.”

When baby Heracles strangled Hera’s vipers, Alcmene knew he was Zeus’ son.
[52]

Heracles grew like a young sapling in an orchard. As a youth, he had the best
teachers for everything: Linus for music, the son of Apollo and Psamathe;
Eurytus for archery; Amphitryon for chariot-driving; and Autolycus, the father
of Anticlea, for wrestling. But in a fit of anger Heracles killed Linus. The teacher
struck the student, as teachers will, for a mistake—and Heracles picked up the
stool on which he was sitting and struck him back. The young hero was banished
from Thebes to the slopes and gorges of a nearby mountain, where he killed a
lion that was preying on the cattle of Thespius, the king of Thespiae. In
gratitude, Thespius let the young man sleep with all his daughters, and there
were fifty of them, each more fair than her sisters. Thespius could recognize a
hero when he saw one, and wanted his grandchildren to inherit something of that
spirit.
Heracles engineered his return to Thebes by offering to do Creon an immense
favor. Thebes at the time was subject to Orchomenus, and paid the king of
Orchomenus one hundred oxen every year, a heavy burden. But Heracles led the
Theban army out into the field and inflicted a decisive defeat on the people of
Orchomenus, though Amphitryon died in the battle. Creon gave Heracles his
daughter Megara to wed, and she proved to be a loyal wife and sensible mother.
The years passed in peace. Heracles grew in strength and Megara bore him fine
children, who were the delight of their parents. But heroes are not destined for
peace. Hera hadn’t finished persecuting the son of Zeus—she would never
finish, until his death—and from high Olympus she sent a fit of madness down
into the home of Heracles and Megara. Suddenly, the house seemed strange to
Heracles, as though it were the home of some enemy. It was filled with foes, and
he hunted them from room to room, slaughtering as he went.
When Athena saw what was going on, she raced down from Olympus and hurled
a stone at Heracles’ head. He dropped unconscious and sprawled on the floor,
blood matting his thick-curled hair and beard. When he came to his senses, he
found that the corpses that littered the rooms were not those of hostile strangers.
Megara and his children lay on the floor, their lives ripped from them with
appalling savagery.
Horror-struck, Heracles went weeping to Delphi to seek the advice of Apollo.
The god told him that he had to serve his cousin Eurystheus, king of Tiryns, for

The god told him that he had to serve his cousin Eurystheus, king of Tiryns, for
twelve years, and carry out whatever tasks he should set him. And the gods had
Eurystheus set him hard labors, well nigh impossible, for Heracles was a man of
great power and had to be tested greatly. But Apollo also declared, though not to
Heracles himself, that at the end of this time Heracles should become immortal,
not just for ridding the world of many evils, but especially for having aided the
gods in their battle against the Giants.

The Twelve Labors of Heracles
The first batch of Heracles’ labors all took place in the Peloponnese. At the time,
it was a wild and unruly place, as was much of the world, but Eurystheus seized
the opportunity to make it safe, with Heracles as his heroic agent. For the first
labor, Eurystheus demanded the skin of a lion that was ruining men’s livelihoods
in the hills around nearby Nemea. Now, this lion, the offspring of the Chimera,
had been raised by Hera specifically to be a trial for Heracles. Sword blades bent
on its impenetrable hide, and clubs, such as the one Heracles carried, simply
bounced off. When Heracles drew close to its lair, the lion sprang at him from a
dark thicket. Its claws and fangs ripped Heracles’ flesh, but he flung aside his
weapons, knowing how useless they were, and wrestled the creature with his
bare hands. The fight was fierce, but brief, as Heracles locked his arms around
the lion’s neck and strangled it to death.
After staunching his wounds, he used the creature’s own razor-sharp claws to
flay the otherwise uncuttable hide. And ever after Heracles wore the lionskin as
his armor, with the jaws agape over his head as a helmet, the mane falling
around his neck, and the rest of the pelt draping his powerful shoulders. He is
known to all by his lionskin, his bow, and his club—a brigand’s attire. For
Heracles tamed the world, but he was not tame himself.
For the second labor, Heracles was sent to kill the Hydra, a serpentine water
monster living in the marshes of Lerna, near Argos. Again, Hera had nurtured
this vile offspring of Typhoeus, hoping that it would end the life of her
husband’s bastard favorite. The creature writhed out of the turbid water to meet
him, its nine heads hissing and snapping and spitting deadly poison. Eight of the
heads were mortal, but one was immortal. Heracles confidently crushed one of
the Hydra’s heads with his club, and slime and scum and blood sprayed in all
directions—but then two heads, equally ghastly and dangerous, sprang up in
place of the one he had crushed. And a gigantic crab emerged from the swamp,
another of Hera’s pets, whose enormous, snapping claws threatened to

disembowel the hero.
Ducking beneath the Hydra’s hissing mouths as they snaked toward him,
Heracles first smashed his club down onto the crab’s shell. No one but he could
have even cracked the adamantine carapace, but one blow left the monster
twitching feebly in the shallows, its dying claws snapping feebly at thin air. Hera
was so fond of it that she translated it into the heavens as the constellation
Cancer.
Meanwhile, Heracles was struggling with the Hydra. Its body was entirely
invulnerable, and its heads multiplied themselves if attacked. He clearly couldn’t
manage alone, and he summoned his loyal companion Iolaus, the son of his twin
brother Iphicles, from their camp. If Hera could cheat by sending two monsters
at once, he was allowed an ally. Hera was desperate for the hero to fail: if he
failed at any one of the labors set him by Eurystheus, even Zeus could not allow
him to become immortal.

Each time Heracles crushed one of the Hydra’s heads, two grew back in its
place.[53]
Heracles and Iolaus danced around the Hydra, nimbly dodging the gouts of
poison that spewed from its mouths. Every time Heracles’ club struck off or
crushed one of the Hydra’s heads, Iolaus immediately seared the stump with a
blazing torch, to prevent another two heads from sprouting up.
Finally, Heracles was left with only the immortal head. He struck it off with his
club and buried it forever under an enormous rock. The monster’s corpse lay
jerking spasmodically in the turbulent water, oozing deadly poison from the
cauterized stumps of its necks, and as it died it seemed as though scores of
snake-like vapors wriggled through the waters of the marsh away from the

snake-like vapors wriggled through the waters of the marsh away from the
corpse. But with an eye to the future—an unseeing eye, as it turned out—
Heracles dipped the heads of his arrows in the venom.
For the third labor, Eurystheus asked Heracles to bring him a hind that lived on
Mount Cerynea in Arcadia. This was a marvelous creature, with golden horns,
despite being female. The hind was harmless, but the task was still peculiarly
difficult, for the gentle animal was sacred to Artemis. Anyone who harmed it
would incur the wrath of the goddess, and she had proved with Actaeon and
others just how terrible her wrath could be. For month after month, Heracles
chased the hind over hill and dale, looking for an opportunity to capture it.
Many times he could have killed it from a distance with an arrow, but every time
he crept up on it, the wary creature bounded away, and it was incredibly swift. In
the end, he gave up trying to capture it with just his bare hands. It was
impossible; he might as well try to make rope from sand. He took careful aim
and barely grazed the hind with an arrow—just enough to slow it down—and
then captured it and slung it across his shoulders to carry back to Tiryns. Artemis
intercepted him and demanded to know what he was doing with her hind, but
Heracles, thinking quickly, explained that he was on a mission for Eurystheus, as
commanded by Artemis’ brother Apollo.
For the fourth labor, Heracles had to round up an enormous boar that was
devastating the land around Mount Erymanthus in northwest Arcadia. Not a root
or blade of grass or ear of grain remained, and the monster was as big as a bull,
but Heracles had to bring it back alive. He tracked the ferocious animal to its den
and enticed it out. For days, they parried each other’s attacks, but the boar was
always too swift and too strong for Heracles to trap in his nets. Eventually, high
in the mountains of Arcadia, he found the solution. He drove the monstrous
beast into a snowdrift, which halted it in its tracks long enough for Heracles to
stun it with his club. Then he wrapped it in his nets, hauled it up onto his
shoulders, and made his way back to Tiryns. The boar was so hideous and
menacing, even when muffled in Heracles’ net, that when the hero entered
Eurystheus’ palace, the king promptly scurried off and took refuge inside a large
storage jar! Heracles despised him for his lack of spirit, and held the boar snout
first above the mouth of the jar, so that the cowardly king got a good look at the
fearsome beast. “And yet you are my master,” sneered the hero.
On his way to Mount Erymanthus, Heracles happened upon another adventure—
and a further sign that he was a man of destiny. He stopped for the night at the
cave of the Centaur Pholus, and it turned out that this was a fated as well as a

cave of the Centaur Pholus, and it turned out that this was a fated as well as a
fateful visit. Dozens of years earlier, Dionysus himself had given Pholus a large
jar of wine, with instructions that it was not to be opened until Heracles paid a
visit. Pholus sank the jar into the ground for safe keeping and forgot about it;
now, as a good host, he opened it. But the fragrant aroma attracted all the rest of
the Centaurs from his tribe, and they stormed Pholus’ cave in their mad greed for
the sweet wine. Heracles successfully defended the cave mouth and drove them
off with flaming brands and arrows, and then set out in pursuit of the rest.
Some of the Centaurs he tracked all the way to Thessaly, where they took refuge
in the cave of their wise cousin Cheiron. Heracles attacked them there, and in the
course of the siege Cheiron himself was wounded by one of Heracles’ poisontipped arrows. This was the last thing Heracles wanted, and what made it worse
was that Cheiron was immortal, the son of Philyra, one of the daughters of
Ocean, and Cronus in the form of a horse. He could not die, only suffer
unimaginable torment as the poison spread and seared his whole body from
inside. In his agony, he appealed to Zeus for relief. Even Zeus couldn’t just
cancel Cheiron’s immortality, but he banked it for Heracles in the future. So
Cheiron could die and be free at last of pain.
After attending sorrowfully to the Centaur’s burial, Heracles returned to
Pholus’s cave in the Peloponnese, where further horror awaited him. While the
hero was away, the Centaur had busied himself burying his slaughtered fellow
tribesmen, consigning them to the worms and the gods. He then set about tidying
the cave and collecting all Heracles’ spent arrows. He held one shaft lightly
between thumb and forefinger, turning it this way and that, marveling that
something so slight and slender could fell something as great as a Centaur. But
in the course of his musing, he accidentally dropped the arrow, point first, onto
the fleshy spot just above his hoof. Before long the Hydra’s venom had done its
lethal work. The two Centaurs who were the best and noblest of their kind were
dead, innocent victims of their race’s weakness for wine.
For the fifth labor, Heracles traveled to Elis, in the northwest of the Peloponnese,
where Augeas was king. Augeas was rich in cattle and owned huge numbers of
them—but their stables had never been cleaned out and were deep in
accumulated ordure. Heracles’ job was to muck out the stables within a single
day. This was an impossible task, and Eurystheus fully expected Heracles to fail.
But the canny hero found a solution to the messy problem: he diverted two rivers
through the stables, and their rushing waters did the job for him with daylight to
spare.

spare.
Now, Augeas had also promised Heracles a tithe of all his cattle if he should
succeed, but he reneged on his promise and drove out of Elis both Heracles and
his own son Phyleus, who was ashamed by his father’s behavior and took
Heracles’ side. They were received in the home of Dexamenus of Olympia, and
in return Heracles did him a favor. His fair daughter was being harassed by the
Centaur Eurytion’s unwanted attentions, but just one of Heracles’ arrows curbed
the creature’s ardor forever. This was also the occasion when Heracles instituted
the games at Olympia, by measuring out the length of the stadium where the
footraces were to be held: he took a deep breath and sprinted until he had to
draw breath again, and that was the length of the stadium.
For the sixth labor, Eurystheus sent Heracles to Stymphalus, a town in northeast
Arcadia. There was a beautiful lake there, overlooked by mountains and
bordered by wooded shores—but the woods had been taken over by a flock of
terrible birds, which could shoot their feathers like deadly arrows. Heracles
could not expect just to enter the dark forest and shoot them from their lofty
perches: the foliage was dense and their camouflaged plumage hid them well.
But Athena gave him a bronze rattle, which Heracles dashed repeatedly against a
mountain. The clamor spooked the birds and sent them soaring from their treetop
roosts, squawking in alarm. And while they were circling in the open air, too
frenzied to fire their feathers, Heracles shot them down with his trusty bow.
The final six labors sent Heracles all over the world—and even under it. The
seventh took him to Crete, where he had to bring back to Tiryns the gift of
Poseidon that Minos had rejected: the perfect, lusty, white bull with which
Pasiphae had mated. Heracles lassoed it, swam back to the Peloponnese with the
bull in tow, and drove it with his club to Tiryns. After Eurystheus had seen the
bull, to verify the completion of the labor, the sacred beast was set free to
wander where it would. It ended up near Athens, on the plain of Marathon,
where it wreaked havoc (as we have seen), until Theseus caught it, tamed it, and
sacrificed it to Apollo.
For the eighth labor, Heracles traveled to Thrace, to fetch the famous mares of
King Diomedes, a warlike son of Ares. On the way he lodged as a guest with
King Admetus of Pherae, and this was the famous occasion when he wrestled
Death to restore to life Alcestis, the king’s wife. Then he continued on to Thrace.

Heracles wrestled Death to win life for Alcestis, peerless wife of King Admetus
of Pherae.[54]
Despite appearances, Diomedes’ mares were scarcely ordinary horses: their
preferred food was human flesh. There were four of them, so that Heracles stood
no chance against them, but he had expressly been forbidden to take his nephew
Iolaus or anyone else to help him. He had to manage by himself. But he had had
plenty of time to think up a plan that was simplicity itself. As soon as he arrived,
he picked up Diomedes himself and flung him into the mares’ paddock. While
the creatures were gorging themselves on their erstwhile master, he crept up on
them and bridled them. Since it was Diomedes who had trained them in their
man-eating ways, his death released them from the spell.
The horses allowed themselves to be harnessed to a chariot, but they were hardly
tame, and they shot off in entirely the wrong direction, to the north instead of the
south. In Scythia they encountered bitter weather. Heracles burrowed under his
lionskin to rest, but while he was asleep the horses, which had been rooting
around in the snow for something edible, were silently spirited away, leaving
only the chariot yoke to which they had been harnessed.
The next morning, Heracles went in search of his lost horses, and came upon a
cave where there lived a curious creature. The elegant form of a beautiful
woman ended not in legs, but in a viper’s tail. Echidna was her name, and she
confessed to hiding Heracles’ horses, but refused to part with them until he had
slept with her. She conceived three boys, and before he left Heracles made her a
magnificent bow. Whichever of his sons, when they grew up, could draw the
bow would be the ruler of the land—and it was the youngest, Scythes, who
managed the feat, and became the first king of Scythia.

managed the feat, and became the first king of Scythia.
Finally, Heracles drove the horses in triumph back to Tiryns, where Eurystheus
dedicated them to queenly Hera and set them free.

Diomedes trained his mares as man-eaters; Heracles cured the habit by feeding
them their master.[55]
For the ninth labor, Eurystheus ordered Heracles to bring him back the golden
war-belt of the Amazon queen Hippolyta, as proof that he had rid the world of
the barbarous troublemakers. The belt had been made for Hippolyta by the wargod Ares himself, and rendered its wearer invincible. The Amazons, warrior
women who live by themselves and take in men only for pleasure and
procreation, make their home in Scythia, at the northern edge of the world, and
are famed for their martial prowess.

are famed for their martial prowess.
Heracles and his allies (including Peleus, Telamon, and the ever-loyal Iolaus) lay
in ambush for the queen’s sister Melanippe, captured her, and then sent a
message to Hippolyta, demanding the belt as ransom for their captive. Hippolyta
sent the belt back with the messenger straight away, but she had no intention of
giving it up, or of sacrificing her sister. The Greek heroes were about to reembark, prize in hand, for the voyage back to Greece, when the Amazons
attacked. The battle was fierce, but it was an utter defeat for the warrior women.
Telamon slew Melanippe, while Heracles himself killed Hippolyta. He took the
magic belt back to Tiryns, and even now it is displayed in the temple of Hera at
Argos.
On his way back from Scythia with the belt, Heracles stopped at Troy—and fell
into another adventure. It so happened that he found Hesione, the daughter of the
Trojan king Laomedon, helplessly bound to a rock, the unwilling victim of a sea
monster. In retaliation for Laomedon’s failure to pay him his due for building the
walls of Troy, Poseidon had commanded the sea to rise up and flood the
farmland up to the city walls; and he had sent the foul, fanged beast to devastate
the remaining land and bring the king to his knees. Laomedon consulted an
oracle and was told that he would have to sacrifice Hesione, but he was not
resigned to this course of action alone. He also announced that whoever could
save his daughter from death and free the land from the monster would receive
as his reward immortal horses. These were the noble steeds that Laomedon’s
grandfather Tros had been given by Zeus in compensation for the loss of his son
Ganymede, whom Zeus loved and took up to Olympus.
Wise Athena and the Trojans built for Heracles a sturdy barrier close to the
shoreline. Heracles hid behind it and waited for the monster to emerge from the
depths of the sea. When it came, it opened wide its stinking jaws to swallow
Hesione, and the fair maiden swooned from the stench. But Heracles leapt out of
his hiding-place and dived into the monster’s gaping mouth. The surest way to
kill it was from the inside, disgusting though the prospect was. Once he had
stabbed the monster to death and hacked his way out of the horrid pile of flesh
and intestines, the waters receded from the Trojan plain. Heracles freed Hesione
and restored her to the arms of her parents, and sailed back home with the
horses. But Laomedon cheated and gave him not the immortal mares of Tros, but
ordinary horses. He would pay for it.

For the tenth labor, Heracles had to drive back to Tiryns the red cattle of Geryon.
There were many obstacles. For a start, Geryon lived on the island of Erytheia,
which was situated as far west as it is possible to go, where the sun sets and the
entrance to Hades is located, on the far side of the river Ocean, that none dare
even think of crossing. Then Geryon himself—the offspring of Chrysaor and
Callirhoe, the daughter of Ocean—was a terrible creature: three huge human
bodies tapered down to a single waist, from which three pairs of legs sprouted,
and the whole was topped with heads of such hideous ugliness that he resembled
his grandmother, the Gorgon Medusa, thrice multiplied. Finally, his cattle were
tended by a gigantic cowherd and a savage two-headed dog, Orthus, another of
the dread children of Typhoeus.
There was no way that Heracles could get to Erytheia without help. The island is
so mysterious that many people deny its existence altogether, or consign it to the
realm of myth. Helios the all-seeing sun would know of its whereabouts, so first
Heracles had to travel to the far east, to catch the sun just as he rose. But when
Heracles consulted him, Helios refused to help—until Heracles notched an arrow
to his bow and threatened him. Then the bright shiner gave Heracles a fabulous
golden cup, which would convey him to the western edge of the world.
No sooner had Heracles embarked in the cup on Ocean than the river threw up
choppy waves with which to swamp the hero. This time it was Ocean’s turn to
feel the force of Heracles’ dark-browed anger and the power of his threats. He
promptly subsided, and conveyed Heracles in his cup from the far east to the far
west. The voyage took months, or it might have been instantaneous, but once
Heracles reached Erytheia, he was on familiar ground: there was only a trio of
horrible monsters to deal with.

“Then the bright-shiner gave Heracles a fabulous golden cup, which would
convey him to the western edge of the world.”[56]
He made short work of killing all three. He shot down the gigantic cowherd from
afar with his arrows, and did the same for Orthus when it charged at him, both
jaws slavering in anticipation of meat. Then he advanced on heavily armored
Geryon with his sword. The first stage was the hardest: killing one of the bodies
while parrying the thrusts of the other two; but once the first torso lolled back
dead, like a drooping poppy, Heracles made short work of dispatching the other
two.
Then he re-embarked on the Cup of Helios, taking the cattle with him, as red as
the setting sun. He made land at Spain and set out for Greece, driving the cattle
before him. But first, to commemorate his remarkable voyage, he set up two
pillars, one on either side of the strait between the Mediterranean and the Outer
Seas. What was beyond was beyond; out there, on the perimeter, there are no
stars.
It was a long drive back to Greece, and Heracles had several adventures on the
way. In the land of the Celts he was attacked by the local tribesmen, who came

way. In the land of the Celts he was attacked by the local tribesmen, who came
at him in such numbers that he soon ran out of ammunition. In desperation, he
prayed to his father Zeus, who sent a rain of slingshot-sized stones, which
Heracles used to repel his attackers. The plain near Massilia is still littered with
the stones. A little further on, two lawless sons of Poseidon, Ialebion and
Dercymus, tried to steal the amazing red cattle from Heracles, but succeeded
only in encompassing their own deaths. Their only claim to fame is to have
fallen before the might of Heracles.
Continuing south, Heracles passed with the cattle into Italy. On the future site of
Rome, the fire-breathing brigand Cacus, a son of Hephaestus, stole some of the
cattle while Heracles was asleep, and dragged them backward into his cave, so
that their hoof prints seemed to lead in the opposite direction. Heracles was
baffled, and reluctantly set out with the remaining cattle, even though returning
without the full complement might not count as a completed labor. But just as he
was setting off, the lowing of his cattle was answered from the depths of the
cave by a bellow from one of the stolen calves. Heracles assaulted the rustler’s
stronghold, throttled him, and recovered his stolen livestock.
From Italy Heracles crossed over to Sicily, where Eryx, king of the western half
of the island, challenged him to a wrestling match, with the cattle as the prize.
Foolish Eryx, to listen to Hera’s whispering and think he could win! Heracles
threw him to the ground three times for the match, before killing him. And then
at last Heracles returned to Greece. When his epic drive was over and he reached
Tiryns with the cattle, Eurystheus was fully satisfied, and sacrificed them to
Hera.
The eleventh labor was just as challenging. Far in the west lived the three
Hesperides, the daughters of Night. Their life’s work was gardening, and they
lived in bliss, singing and dancing and tending, above all, to one particular tree
in their grove. This tree, the wedding gift of Earth herself to Zeus and Hera,
produced golden apples whose sweet flesh gave eternal youth. But the tree was
guarded by the dragon Ladon, which was coiled, ever sleepless, around its roots;
and Ladon was sibling to the dreadful Gorgons.
Again, as with the island of Erytheia, Heracles’ first problem was finding the
way there, since the garden of the Hesperides was situated beyond the
knowledge of men. He first visited the nymphs of the river Eridanus in the far
north, where the river’s waters mingle with Ocean. They didn’t know the way,
but they sent him to find the sea-god Nereus, who like all his kind was both wise
and a shape-shifter. He would impart the information, however, only if Heracles

and a shape-shifter. He would impart the information, however, only if Heracles
managed to maintain a grip on him, whatever form or forms he changed into.
Heracles tracked Nereus down to a deserted shore. The hoary old deity was easy
to recognize, because he was impossible to recognize. His features and form
shimmered and dissolved even as Heracles looked at him; he was never quite
what he was, always in the process of becoming something else. But Heracles
knew what he had to do, and grabbed hold of him. Without a moment’s
hesitation, Nereus changed into a lion—but Heracles’ grip remained firm. Then
in the blink of an eye he became a writhing serpent, then fire, then water—but
still Heracles kept hold of him, and at last Nereus had to concede defeat, and he
told Heracles where he could find the garden of the Hesperides.
It was clear from what Nereus said, however, that the task was quite beyond
even Heracles’ abilities. It wasn’t just that the apples were guarded by Ladon,
but that the garden itself was unreachable, hidden behind veils that were not of
this world. So Heracles wandered in dejection, and his aimless feet brought him
to Egypt and Libya. In both places, he continued his work of pacifying and
civilizing the earth. Busiris, the king of Egypt, had the unpleasant habit of
slaughtering all visitors to his land at the altar of Zeus. Heracles let himself be
bound and taken, a meek prisoner, to the altar—and then exploded into action,
bursting his bonds and killing Busiris and all his attendants, freeing the land
from foul tyranny.
Antaeus, the king of Libya, was a giant, the son of Earth and Poseidon, and he
wrestled to death any and every visitor to his realm. His mother’s merest touch
made him invincible. If any opponent did manage to throw him, that only
brought him into contact with the earth and renewed his energy. So many men
had failed to defeat him that he had used their skulls to construct a temple to his
father. Heracles began by wrestling Antaeus in the normal way, attempting to
throw him to the ground, but he soon understood what was going on. It reminded
him of a dream he had once had, in which he was battling the Giants on the side
of the gods … He held Antaeus above his head, off the ground, and as the giant
weakened, Heracles slowly crushed him to death with his bare hands.
But these adventures were mere distractions. On and on Heracles roamed,
seeking advice, and at last he ended up in the Caucasus mountains, where
Prometheus lay chained to the solid rock, waiting by night for the eagle to return
every day to eat his liver. Heracles shot the eagle with his bow, and in gratitude
Prometheus advised him to seek out his brother Atlas, whom Zeus had punished

Prometheus advised him to seek out his brother Atlas, whom Zeus had punished
by having him support the sky on his back forever, to keep earth and sky apart.
Atlas knew where the garden of the Hesperides was, and it would be easy for a
Titan like him to go and get the apples.
Heracles journeyed west again until he found Atlas standing firm, with the sky
resting on his head and clouds veiling his shoulders. He explained the situation
to the Titan, and asked for his help in gaining the golden apples. “I can help,
certainly,” said Atlas. “But what will you do for me in return?” Heracles made
various offers, none of which were acceptable. But the Titan had his own
suggestion. “I’ll get the apples for you,” he said, “if you shoulder my burden
while I’m away.” Heracles agreed, and with a grunt took the sky on his
shoulders and head, while Atlas disappeared over the horizon.
Time passed, but Heracles’ task required all his attention and he didn’t notice its
passage. Eventually Atlas returned, and indeed he had the apples with him. But
the liberated Titan was reluctant to take on his great burden once more. “I’ll take
the apples to Eurystheus myself,” he offered enthusiastically.
“Fair enough,” said Heracles. “You’ve well and truly outsmarted me, and now
I’ll have to carry the sky forever. But, first, let me get a cushion for my aching
head. Just take the sky for a moment, and then I’ll take it back.” Of course, no
sooner had Atlas shouldered the sky again than Heracles picked up the apples
and left. Atlas fumed with helpless rage, but soon Heracles was beyond the
range of his complaints. And so Eurystheus gained the far-famed apples—but
they were not his for long. Athena declared that they were too sacred to be part
of the dismal world of mortals, and she took them back to the faery land of the
Hesperides.
The twelfth and final labor was the hardest, as Heracles’ shade admitted to
Odysseus, when the much-traveled man summoned him up from Hades. He had
to fetch up from the underworld three-headed, snake-tailed Cerberus, offspring
of Typhoeus. Cerberus was a kind of valve for the entrance to Hades’ realm: he
would greet new arrivals with canine obsequiousness, fawning on them and
wagging his tail; but should any of the dead try to depart, the hell-hound turned
savage and devoured the wretched ghost. But Heracles pinioned the creature and
dragged him away on a triple-tied leash, though Cerberus snarled his reluctance
every inch of the way. The dark lord Hades and his lady Persephone protested at
the removal of their watchdog, but Hermes explained the situation and promised
that Cerberus would soon resume his post. In the palace of Tiryns, Eurystheus

once again took cover in his big jar, and only peeked out to confirm that
Heracles had succeeded in this, his final task. And then the hero, true to his
word, returned the hound to Hades.
Heracles, a living man, had entered the underworld and come back again, against
all the odds. Only Orpheus and Theseus would ever match such an extraordinary
feat. Before entering the underworld, Heracles had taken one of the cattle from
Hades’ own herd, and sacrificed it as a blood offering to propitiate the
underworld deities. Hades’ cowherd Menoetes tried to stop Heracles stealing the
cow and Heracles would have killed him, had Persephone not ordered the two
apart. But the vapors of the blood of the sacrifice summoned up shades with
information for Heracles, and so he met the ghost of Meleager, the son of Ares
and Althaea. And though it was scarcely usual for a living person to enter into a
contract with one of the dead, Meleager gave Heracles his sister Deianeira,
daughter of Dionysus, as a wife, to replace Megara, for whose death Heracles
had now at last atoned.

Heracles the King-Maker
Heracles’ trials had by no means finished with the end of the twelve labors and
betrothal to Deianeira, his destined bride. No hero ever suffered as Heracles
suffered. No body bore the scars that Heracles bore, or endured so much mental
pain. For as he surpassed all others in excellence, so his life-path surpassed all
others in difficulty.
One piece of unfinished business lay with Augeas. Heracles’ fifth labor had been
to clean the stables of the Elean king, and Augeas had promised him, as a reward
if he succeeded, a tenth of his cattle. He didn’t expect the hero to succeed, and
when it came to it he refused to pay up. So when Heracles was free of his labors,
and living in Argos, he returned to Elis to seek his revenge, and to install
Augeas’s son, honest Phyleus, on the throne in his place.
Heracles arrived in Elis at the head of a considerable army. The battle was short
but fierce. Heracles’ brother Iphicles died in the fighting, cut down by the
Moliones, armored twins joined at the hip; but Heracles was close at hand and
they did not long outlive their victim. The mission was a complete success: the
city was taken and Augeas killed, and Phyleus assumed the throne instead.
Iphicles’ funeral was suitably lavish.
This was not the only major military expedition Heracles organized in those days
in the Peloponnese. He also launched an all-out attack on Sparta for the sake of a

in the Peloponnese. He also launched an all-out attack on Sparta for the sake of a
murdered kinsman. Once Oeonus, one of Heracles’ nephews, was passing the
mansion of the king of Sparta, a man called Hippocoön. One of the king’s
mastiffs set upon the traveler, who naturally picked up a stone and threw it at the
dog to keep it at bay. But Hippocoön’s sons took this amiss. Angry words turned
to fisticuffs, and then daggers were drawn. Before long Oeonus lay dead in the
dust, and the mountains looked on impassively.
Once again Heracles summoned his friends and allies. At first Cepheus of Tegea
was unwilling to leave his city undefended, but Heracles needed him and his
twenty sons as allies. The son of Zeus called upon Athena for help and the great
goddess gave him a lock of the hair of the Gorgon Medusa. One of the daughters
of Cepheus was to raise this serpent lock high from the city walls three times in
her hand, and this would serve as a sure shield for the city and protect it from all
harm.
Then Cepheus agreed to join Heracles’ expedition, but so valiantly did his sons
fight that almost all of them were killed, along with their father. Even Heracles
was wounded in the hand, the sign of a rare lapse of self-confidence. But Sparta
fell. Heracles killed the king and all twelve of his sons, and installed Tyndareos
(descended from the Titan Atlas) on the throne in place of Hippocoön.

Heracles Becomes a God
Meleager’s ghost had promised Heracles the hand of his sister Deianeira, but
first Heracles had to win her. She had a rival suitor, no less than Achelous, the
river-god, whose courtship of the girl had been persistent: he had appeared to her
as a bull, a snake, and a composite creature, half bull, half man. In fact, fairgirdled Deianeira was about to give in when Heracles arrived.
For the wrestling match that would decide her future husband, Achelous chose
the form of a bull. He pawed the ground and charged at Heracles, but the mighty
hero stood his ground and took the force of the bull’s charge. He seized the
bull’s horns and twisted with all his might to force the creature to its knees. So
strong was Heracles, and so fierce the resistance of Achelous, that with a
sickening crack one of the horns snapped off in Heracles’ hands. At last the
scales of the fight tipped in Heracles’ favor as the bull’s strength slackened, and
then it was only a matter of time.
Once Achelous had admitted defeat, he and Heracles exchanged horns. Achelous
wanted his broken horn back, and in return gave Heracles the Horn of Amalthea

wanted his broken horn back, and in return gave Heracles the Horn of Amalthea
—the very horn of plenty with which Zeus had been fed in infancy in the Cretan
cave. This magical horn had the property that it never ran out of food or drink;
every time it was emptied, it filled right up again with all the good things of the
earth. Heracles’ household would indeed prosper.
So Heracles took his prize, his new wife, back to Argos. Along the way they
were joined by the Centaur Nessus, one of the last of his kind—and, as it turned
out, true to his nature. At one point, the trio had to cross a raging river. Nessus
invited Deianeira to ride across on his back, and Heracles accepted the kindseeming gesture. But as soon as they reached the far bank, while Heracles was
still on the other side, the Centaur attempted to rape Deianeira.

Nessus tried to rape Deianeira, but Heracles’ sure aim brought the Centaur
down.[57]
Alerted by her screams, Heracles looked up. The width of a river was nothing to
such an expert marksman, and Heracles’ poison-tipped shaft took deadly effect.
Nessus’s blood poured from the wound and mingled with his seed, which had
spilled on the ground during the bungled rape. Before Heracles had time to wade
across the river and rejoin Deianeira, the Centaur advised the naive young
woman to gather some of this potent mixture. “It’s a love potion,” he gasped, as
his life ebbed away. “We Centaurs know about such things. It will stop Heracles

loving any other woman.” A wonder it seemed, and she collected a phial of the
fatal drug, but told Heracles nothing about it. Heracles and Deianeira lived long
and happily in Argos, and Deianeira bore two fine children, Hyllus and Macaria.
But Heracles’ amorous nature got the better of him, and he fell in love with Iole,
princess of Oechalia, daughter of King Eurytus. For it was fated that she should
be the instrument of Heracles’ death and deification.
Beautiful Iole had many suitors, and Eurytus arranged an archery competition,
with his daughter as the prize. The final round pitted Heracles against his old
teacher, for Eurytus had taught him archery in his youth. Two stout bows were
drawn back; two swift arrows were notched; and they let fly, master and pupil.
Iole herself went to fetch the target and carry it back to the contestants: by a
hair’s breadth, Heracles was the winner. But in a shameless display of
unsportsmanlike conduct, Eurytus refused Heracles his prize, and the lionskinclad hero returned trophy-less to Tiryns, nursing black vengeance in his heart. It
was not Heracles, however, who was destined to take the life of the Oechalian
king. Eurytus went on to challenge Apollo himself to a test of bowmanship, and
lost both the contest and his life.
Now, after a while one of Iole’s brothers, Iphitus, came to Tiryns in pursuit of
some horses, thinking that Heracles might have stolen them (as in fact he had).
He had been searching all over the Peloponnese. In Messenia he had met
Odysseus and had given him Eurytus’ far-famed bow as a gift, knowing that his
father’s treasure was in good hands. When Iphitus came to Argos, Heracles
feigned innocence. He treated the young man well and lodged him. But in the
course of a drunken dinner, when Iphitus accused him of rustling the horses,
Heracles picked him up and hurled him to his death from the high point of the
city. Iphitus’ dying screams brought Heracles to his senses, and he realized what
he had done—killed a guest, one who had done no more than speak the truth—
and all guests were under the protection of Zeus. Another fit of madness had
caused another change in the life of Heracles and his family.
The murder ran the risk of polluting the city, and who knew what plague or pest
the gods would send in retaliation? Once again Heracles became an exile. This
time he chose to take his family to Trachis, a town in central Greece, north of
Delphi. On the way, the refugees were set upon by Cycnus, a son of Ares, who
made his headquarters a cave near the sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi, and was
living by stealing the sacrificial victims worshippers brought there as the price
for consulting the oracle.

Heracles and Iolaus did battle with Cycnus, but Ares himself came down from
Olympus to support his son, and the heroes were driven off. Before long,
however, with Athena’s encouragement, they rallied and returned to the fray.
Cycnus soon lay dead on the ground, while over his body Heracles and Ares
fought, and the heavy silence was broken only by their grunts. They were so
evenly matched that they might be fighting still, if father Zeus had not broken
the contest up by hurling a thunderbolt between the two contestants. Ares limped
back to Olympus; never before had a mortal held his own against the god of war.
But then Heracles was on the way to becoming a god.
After leaving his family at Trachis, Heracles went to Pylos, intending to receive
purification from the king, Neleus, and to stay there for the prescribed period of
time, until there was no further risk of pollution from Iphitus’ death. But Neleus
refused to purify him from his sin, and Heracles, brow darkened with anger,
swore vengeance. The spirit of a true warrior is never broken by a mere setback.
Heracles left, but only to gather an army and return.
Now, Neleus had twelve sons by Chloris, the only surviving child of Niobe, and
one of these sons was Periclymenus, the shape-shifter. It had been foretold that
Pylos would never fall as long as Periclymenus was alive. One by one Neleus’
sons were cut down in the battle, but Periclymenus’ constant changes kept him
alive, and he wreaked terrible slaughter among Heracles’ allies. Finally, he
changed himself into the form of a bee, and rested on the yoke of Heracles’
chariot; but even from afar Heracles recognized the bee as Periclymenus, and
shot it—a superhuman feat of bowmanship.
A full-scale battle developed, with some of the gods involved as well: Athena
and Zeus fought alongside Heracles, while Hera, Hades, and Poseidon supported
the other side. And Heracles, whose achievements were rapidly becoming more
and more remarkable, more and more godlike, succeeded in the course of the
fight in wounding Hera in the right breast and Hades in the shoulder. The poison
from his arrows caused them great pain, but of course they could not be killed.
They made their way back to Olympus, where they were tended by Apollo.
And in the end Neleus was defeated and killed, and the only surviving son,
Nestor, inherited the throne of sandy Pylos and his father’s hatred of Heracles. It
is said that Nestor lived to such a great age because Apollo gave him the years
that had been allotted to his brothers, before Heracles cut them down.

But still Heracles had not found the release of purification from the sin of killing
Iphitus, and now his body was ravaged by foul boils and abscesses. He went to
Delphi to find out what to do, but the Sibyl there was appalled at the state of the
man, who bore the marks of a murderer and a brigand all over his body, and
refused to reply. In anger and disgust, Heracles ran amok and attempted to
plunder the sanctuary of its treasures, including the sacred tripod on which the
Sibyl sat to utter her dark words of prophecy. If she would not look into the
future for him, he would use her tripod to establish his own oracle elsewhere.
But Apollo could not allow this, and he came down in person from high
Olympus, and wrestled Heracles for the tripod. Once again, however, Heracles
held his own against one of the great gods, and once again Zeus had to break the
contest up.
At the command of Zeus, Heracles was sold to Omphale, queen of the Lydians,
to serve as her slave for three years, as the period of purification. Hermes
himself, the god of commerce, negotiated the sale. For all this period of time,
Omphale kept his lionskin and weapons for herself, while he was forced to dress
as a woman, and do woman’s work such as weaving inside the palace.
Nevertheless, she had a child by him—a son called Lamus.
Just like Iobates with Bellerophon, she set him to clear the land of pests. First, he
expelled the Itoni, the first inhabitants of Lydia, who were resisting the rule of
Omphale’s house. Then he dealt with Syleus, a foul-mouthed landowner who
compelled passersby to work in his vineyard. Heracles pretended to go along
with the game, but instead of harvesting the swollen grapes, he swiftly drank up
the wine store and started destroying the vineyard with his mattock. When
Syleus and his daughter came up to protest, Heracles killed them and burned the
vineyard.
Finally, he had to get rid of the Cercopes, two mean little dwarfs who played
spiteful tricks on people. Heracles traveled to Ephesus, where the Cercopes had
their lair, and began to search for them. Although he often got close, they always
evaded him, and all Heracles heard were irritating giggles receding in the
distance. But malice and wisdom tend not to coincide in the same mind. At last,
exhausted, Heracles lay down to rest—and the mischievous Cercopes crept over
to where he lay under a tree and began to steal his weapons. But men like
Heracles sleep with one eye open, and he grabbed them before they could race
away.
Heracles found a stout pole and tied the dwarfs to either end of it, as a way of

Heracles found a stout pole and tied the dwarfs to either end of it, as a way of
carrying them off to permanent confinement. Now, the Cercopes had known for
a long time—their mother had drummed it into their youthful ears—that they
should beware of a black-bottomed man. And when Heracles began to carry the
imps away, they at last understood the bizarre prophecy. Suspended as they were
by their heels upside down from the pole, they got a good look at Heracles’
bottom—and, indeed, it was black—black with wiry hair! This caused the
Cercopes no end of amusement, and they began to make crude jokes about
Heracles and his black bottom. “Which wooded hills are cleft by a valley you’d
never want to walk in?” “What’s black, hairy, and gases strangers?” “I spy with
my little eye something beginning with ‘b.’” That kind of thing. But good men
laugh well, and Heracles enjoyed the jokes so much that he let them go. They
have never been seen since, and the rumor is that they tried to play a practical
joke on Zeus and were turned into monkeys.
After he had completed his three years of penance in Lydia, Heracles made his
way back to Greece up the western coast of Asia Minor. He had a bone to pick
with Laomedon, king of Troy. He had rescued Laomedon’s daughter Hesione
from certain death at the jaws of a sea monster, but Laomedon had cheated.
Instead of giving Heracles the promised reward, the immortal horses of Tros, he
had given him ordinary horses.
Now, this was not the kind of deception that could last: as soon as the horses
began dying, Heracles knew he had been cheated. So he returned to Troy with
eighteen ships to claim his proper prize by force. While Heracles marched with
his men toward the city, Laomedon made a sortie and attacked the ships,
beached and vulnerable on the shore. On his way back to Troy, however, he fell
into an ambush set by Heracles and his allies. Laomedon was killed, and then the
heroes assaulted the city. Telamon was the first to force his way inside, and
received Hesione as the prize for his valor. All of Laomedon’s sons were killed,
save only Priam, whom Heracles, in a final act of king-making, set on the throne
of Troy.
So Heracles set sail from Troy, flushed with victory, and in possession of the
immortal horses. But now it was the time of Hera’s greatest folly—her final
attempt to ruin the life of her husband’s beloved son. She called on Sleep, and he
wove his magic on Zeus, and the father of gods and men fell into a deep
slumber.
While he was asleep, Hera summoned up a savage storm, which separated
Heracles from his companions and drove him south to the island of Cos.

Heracles from his companions and drove him south to the island of Cos.
At first, he was made welcome there by King Eurypylus, who persuaded him to
stay by offering him his daughter Chalciope. As others had before him, he
wanted the blood of the hero to flow in his grandson’s veins. And indeed
Heracles did sire a fine son on Chalciope—Thessalus, the future king of the
island—but not before he and Eurypylus had fallen out. The king drove Heracles
from his palace, and the battle was so hard fought that Zeus had to rescue his son
to protect him from an untimely death. He transported Heracles to a peasant
woman’s hut, where the hero found refuge and escaped in humiliating disguise,
wearing her clothes. But later he returned in force, killed or expelled all the
members of Eurypylus’ family, and established his own dynasty instead.
Finally, after a prolonged absence, the gods allowed Heracles to resume his life
in Trachis. But Zeus punished Hera for her presumption by suspending her from
heaven by golden chains, with anvils on her feet. He had to convince her that her
long hostility to his son was futile, for he was destined to become a god.

“The mortal part of Heracles burned away and descended into Hades, but his
spirit was taken up to Olympus.”[58]
After all this time, Heracles’ passion for Iole had not diminished, and he
returned to Greece still determined to win her, and to complete the unfinished
business at Oechalia. Eurytus was dead, but his surviving sons would pay for
their father’s treachery. Heracles returned at the head of an army and sacked the
city of Oechalia—destroyed it so thoroughly, in fact, that today no one is sure
where it lay. Eurytus’ sons all died in the massacre, and Heracles brought Iole
into his home as his beloved concubine.
Heracles organized a splendid sacrifice, a thanksgiving offering to the gods for
his victory at Oechalia. In a display of solidarity, Deianeira wove a gorgeous

his victory at Oechalia. In a display of solidarity, Deianeira wove a gorgeous
robe for him to wear at the ceremony. Thinking to rid her husband of his foolish
infatuation with Iole, and ensure that his love for her remained lifelong, she
poured the potion of Nessus over the robe, and it soaked into every fiber of the
cloth.
Heracles wore his splendid new robe with pride as he approached the sacrificial
fire. But before he had even begun the holy rite, the robe began to cling to his
body in an uncomfortable fashion, warmed by the flames of the fire. And then it
began to ravage his flesh with its acid. The more he tried to rip the garment off,
the more closely it molded itself to his limbs, like a murderous second skin.
Desperate for the release of death, Heracles had himself carried in agony to
Mount Oeta. While his men were busy building a huge funeral pyre, the
inconsolable Deianeira seized a sword from one of her attendants and fell on it.
Grimacing through his pain and grief, Heracles told Hyllus, his son by
Deianeira, to marry Iole in his place.
Then the great hero lay back on his pyre, his head pillowed by his club, and
commanded his men to light the fire. But none would obey—none wanted the
responsibility of sending a son of Zeus to his death—save only loyal Poeas, a
shepherd. As his reward Heracles gave him his mighty bow; and so his bow and
arrows would come a second time to Troy, for it was fated that a vital
contribution to the sack of Troy would be made by the bow of Heracles.
As the sun rose, the mortal part of Heracles burned away and descended into
Hades, but his spirit was taken up to Olympus by Athena, where Zeus gladly
accepted him among the company of the gods, and blessed him with eternal life
and youth. He ordered Hera to lay aside her grudge and Heracles married her
daughter by Zeus, trim-ankled Hebe. They live forever in bliss as gods among
gods.

Chapter Nine
THE TROJAN WAR
The Marriage of Peleus and Thetis
The course of Peleus’ life was as troubled and tortured as that of many a hero.
Perhaps one of the gods or goddesses bore a grudge against him, or wanted to
test him. His birth, on the island of Aegina, was propitious. His father was the
king, Aeacus, a son of Zeus whose insight and advice were so sound that he
came to be a judge of the dead in Hades. The family seemed to be blessed with
all the good things of life.
Now, Aeacus was married to Endeis, the daughter of the wise Centaur Cheiron,
and Endeis was the mother of Peleus. But Aeacus lusted after Psamathe, the
daughter of Nereus, and though at first she resisted his advances by turning
herself into a seal, his persistence wore her down, and she became his concubine.
She bore him a fine son, called Phocus, who grew up alongside Peleus, but the
house was sorely divided, for Endeis loathed this bastard offspring of her
husband, and was forever plotting ways to do him harm.
In time Endeis’ bitterness seeped into her son’s brain and curdled it, and for the
sake of his mother Peleus resolved to do away with his half-brother. Peleus’ best
friend was Telamon, prince of the neighboring island of Salamis, and they
planned and executed the deed themselves. Phocus was a keen and outstanding
athlete, always practicing for some competition or other. They joined him out in
the fields for one of his training sessions, and while Telamon struck Phocus on
the head with a discus, Peleus swung a double-headed ax into his spine.
As soon as the deed was done, the mist cleared from Peleus’ mind, and he came
to his senses; regret overwhelmed him like a storm wave, and remorse gnawed at
his wits. He took himself away from his native island, and traveled the length
and breadth of the land, searching for someone who would take him in and offer
him purification. But only when he came to Phthia did the king there, kind
Eurytion, extend a hand of welcome. And when the period of purification was
over, Eurytion gave Peleus his daughter Antigone and a share of his kingdom.
But Peleus was fated not yet to find peace. When he and Eurytion joined the
other heroes for the Calydonian boar hunt, he accidentally killed his new friend.
The boar had taken refuge in a dark thicket, and no one knew exactly where it

The boar had taken refuge in a dark thicket, and no one knew exactly where it
was. Peleus heard a noise in the underbrush; the boar was so enormous, and so
fierce, that a second’s delay could make the difference between life and an
appalling death from the creature’s tusks. Already several good men had fallen,
gored in the groin or the stomach, watching their innards steam on the ground
before the blessed release of death closed their eyes. Peleus hurled his trusty
javelin without further pause, but it was Eurytion’s blood that stained the earth.
Once more, then, Peleus had to leave the place he had made his home and take to
the road as an unclean murderer, searching for surcease. This time he ended up
in Iolcus, where Acastus, the son of Pelias, was king, and offered him lodging
for the period of his purification. While Peleus was there, he competed in the
funeral games for Pelias, where his only rival for victory in the wrestling was, to
his masculine shame, Atalanta.
But Astydamia, the wife of Acastus, fell in love with the handsome visitor and
tried to seduce him. When he spurned her advances, a hellish fury overtook her.
First she told Antigone that Peleus was thinking of abandoning her in favor of a
more promising marriage with the daughter of Acastus. Even Antigone’s suicide
did not sate Astydamia’s desire for evil. Next she destroyed Peleus’ livelihood
by sending a ravening wolf against his flocks. Finally, she told her husband that
Peleus had tried to rape her, and Acastus believed her.
Now, Acastus could not simply kill the man he had just purified, so he took his
erstwhile friend out into the wilderness of Mount Pelion. They hunted all
morning, and when they lay down in the shade to rest, Acastus hid Peleus’ sword
—a unique weapon, crafted by Hephaestus himself—in a shrub, and left him
there defenseless against the creatures of the wild. All he could do was clamber
into the branches of a tree while a band of savage Centaurs prowled below. But
the wise Centaur Cheiron took pity on him, returned his sword to him, and kept
him safe from his less civilized fellows.
Now, it so happened that at this time Zeus conceived a longing to sleep with the
beautiful sea-nymph Thetis, daughter of Nereus. But she was fated to bear a
child who would outstrip his father, however great he was, and when, as we have
already told, Prometheus bargained this piece of information for his release from
eternal torment, Zeus and all the gods were anxious to see Thetis married off to a
mortal. None of them wanted to run the risk of being overthrown! Peleus was
available, and the gods thought it would be amusing to see what happened—
what son Thetis would bear for this troubled mortal.

Thetis was a goddess, and she was not best pleased by the idea of being joined in
wedlock to a human being, but Zeus made it a direct order and left her no choice.
For none dare gainsay the will of Zeus—or not for long. Even so, she didn’t
make it easy for Peleus: he had to wrestle her, to tame her, and like her father
she was a shape-shifter. As fast as thought, she became a bird, a snake, a lion, a
panther, and other unnamed and unnameable monsters. But throughout her
transformations Peleus held fast to her, until at last she surrendered to him. He
had proved himself a worthy suitor.

Thetis became all manner of creatures, but Peleus clung to his betrothed with
grim determination.[59]
The wedding was celebrated on Mount Pelion, and the guest list was incredible.
All the gods and goddesses deigned to descend from Olympus to attend, at least
partly in relief that Thetis was not marrying one of them. Everyone was happy
with the way things were. The Muses came too, and the Fates and the Graces.
Nereus was there, of course, as the bride’s father, and Cheiron, the savior of
Peleus, whose gift was a sturdy staff of ash, suitable for the haft of a spear.
Athena herself planed the wood to perfection, Hephaestus made and fitted the
long head of iron, and the rest of the gods contributed a magnificent suit of
armor. But Dionysus gave a magical jar of wine that would never empty.

armor. But Dionysus gave a magical jar of wine that would never empty.
Into the middle of the celebrations hall limped an uninvited guest, in a foul mood
at being overlooked. The goddess Strife, her frowning face lined with the
weariness of her unceasing labors, stayed no more than a few minutes, but she
sowed an evil that would yield countless deaths. She stood scowling in the
middle of the hall where the gods and goddesses were feasting, and let fall a
golden apple, wheedled from the Hesperides.
The apple was inscribed “For the Fairest” and, as Strife had intended, Hera,
Athena, and Aphrodite immediately fell to quarreling, each claiming to be the
most fair, and the rightful possessor of the beautiful bauble. The argument
became so heated that Zeus had to step in and command them to be silent. He
promised to find a way to resolve the matter equably, and ordered them in the
meantime not to mar the wedding. The party had been spoiled, however—and a
heavy doom set in motion.
As calm as the lull before a storm, the happy couple lived in Phthia, where
Peleus succeeded to the throne after the death of Acastus, and ruled wisely and
well. His land flourished, the rain and the winds were moderate, and no wolf
terrorized his people’s flocks. Each man spoke kind words to his neighbor, for
peace and law ruled the land under Peleus’ guidance. In time Thetis bore her
husband a son, and they called the boy Achilles.
But silver-footed Thetis still resented her sojourn in the world of mortals, and
longed to spend time with others of her kind, gamboling in the underwater
realm, or feasting with the gods on high Olympus. If she had to be married to a
mortal husband, she would at least use her powers to ensure that their son was
invulnerable. And so at night she took hold of the infant and dipped him in her
magic cauldron, seeking to purge all traces of mortality from him in the seething
broth.
Six nights she dipped the baby thus, and on the seventh the work would have
been complete. But Peleus spied Thetis at her task and his mortal eyes could see
only that Thetis was dipping their child in a cauldron of boiling water. He cried
out in alarm, and Thetis stopped what she was doing and flung the child away
from her onto the floor. With a disdainful glare at Peleus, she stormed out of the
room, and out of her husband’s life, returning to her watery home. But Achilles
was not quite invulnerable: Thetis had been holding on to her child by his ankle,
pinching the tiny tendon of the heel between her fingers. This last, little bit of his

body had not been dipped for the seventh time into the cauldron.

The Judgment of Paris
The birth pangs were beginning, the contractions still far apart. The baby would
not be born for many hours yet, and Hecuba, queen of Troy, allowed herself to
doze in the spaces between pain.
Suddenly, in the dark of the night, she awoke with a start. “What’s the matter?”
asked one of her handmaids anxiously, wringing the last drops from a facecloth
to cool her panting mistress’s forehead. “Nothing,” Hecuba whispered. “Only a
dream.” But the dream had disturbed her. She saw herself giving birth not to a
human being, but to a blazing torch, whose flames spread and consumed the
whole city of Troy. She heard cries and screams and lamentation, and saw her
husband, King Priam, fall from the city walls.
The baby was born at dawn. The birth was easy, and the little boy seemed
perfect, but still Hecuba was unquiet. The dream had been very powerful. As
was right and proper, especially given her high station, she consulted the
soothsayers to find out what it might mean, though the message seemed all too
obvious. And they confirmed that the boy would grow up to cause the
destruction of the city. They couldn’t presume to advise her what to do, but she
knew anyway.
After consulting her husband, she gave the boy—tentatively named Alexander—
to trusted attendants, who took the squalling child out of the city and into the
wilderness of Mount Ida, where they left him to be torn apart and consumed by
wild beasts. But the first creature to be attracted by the baby’s cries was a
shebear, who had lately given birth herself. She picked up the smooth-skinned
infant in ungentle paws, thinking to sink her teeth into the soft flesh—and to her
astonishment the baby, smelling the milk fresh on her teats, fastened his little
mouth to one of them and began to suck. This she understood; the mother bear’s
fierceness abated, and she let the little human fill his belly until his cries stopped.
So the boy survived. He didn’t starve to death, and the mother bear watched over
him all that first night, protecting him from the cold and other animals. In the
morning, she had to return to her own litter, but the child was sleeping
peacefully. And shepherds came to that part of the mountain, following their
goats as they meandered among the trees and shrubs. One of them took the
infant back to his wife; they raised the boy and called him Paris.

Paris grew up an innocent shepherd boy, and his delight lay in wandering the
glens of the mountains with his father’s flocks. He didn’t know that there was
anything in the world beyond this pastoral life and, like all his fellow shepherds,
felt only contempt for the city folk in nearby Troy. As far as the shepherd
community of Mount Ida was concerned, the city-dwellers were good for
nothing except buying their wool and cheeses.
Then one day his life changed forever. As he was watching his flocks one
morning, the god Hermes suddenly appeared to him, where a moment before
there had been only rocks and grass and meadow flowers. And in Hermes’ train,
seeming to arise out of the ground from the flowers, there came three goddesses.
There was nothing to which Paris could compare this vision. It was more vivid
than any dream, and he was undoubtedly awake. And the beauty of the
goddesses was … well, no mortal woman that Paris had seen or even imagined
came close. He knew immediately that he was in the presence of the divine.
This was the way Zeus had found to solve the contest for the golden apple that
Strife had tossed among the deities celebrating the wedding of Peleus and Thetis.
He chose Paris, for his innocence and noble blood and astounding good looks, to
decide the contest—to make the impossible choice and decide which of the
goddesses was indeed the “fairest.” The father of gods and men gave Hermes his
instructions, and sent him down to Mount Ida with the three divine contestants.
Paris leapt to his feet and paled in terror. “Fear not!” said Hermes, and his voice
was as limpid as the mountain streams in which Paris bathed his limbs. “We
mean you no harm, but bring you great renown. For Zeus, our common father,
has chosen you for a task. Do you see this apple, inscribed ‘For the Fairest’?
Each of these three goddesses thinks that she deserves it. It’s up to you to decide
who gets it.”

Paris was chosen to decide whether Hera, Athena, or Aphrodite was the most
fair goddess.[60]
Eventually, Paris calmed down enough to agree to do the job; he didn’t seem to
have any choice in the matter. He sat down on a rock, while Hermes stood aside
and watched. The first to approach was Hera, and she appeared to the country
boy as a woman of queenly bearing in the glow of full womanhood. A purplebordered gown draped her majestic figure, and her hair, shining like mahogany,
was wound up in an elegant coiffure. Her wide, dark eyes glanced at her
competition with a look that betrayed both envy and disdain. She turned her
attention to young Paris. “If you make the apple mine,” she said, her voice
ringing throughout the dell, “I shall grant you worldly power beyond your
imaginings. You shall rule vast territories, and you shall rule them securely, with
no rivals to your throne.”
Paris was sorely tempted. He was just a shepherd, and here he was being offered
a throne. But, to be fair, he should hear what the other two goddesses had to say
as well. Athena strode briskly forward. She appeared as a keen-eyed warrior,
imbued with a contained force that was ready to be unleashed at a moment’s
notice. Yet she had also the luminous skin and boyish leanness of a virgin.
“Should you decide to grant me the apple,” said the favorite daughter of Zeus,
fixing him with her iron-gray gaze, “I will make you invincible, not just in handto-hand fighting, but in all warfare. You will be the greatest general ever to lead

an army. Thousands shall flock to your banner, and none shall stand against
you.”
This too was a powerfully attractive offer. The decision was not going to be
straightforward, and the contest was beginning to seem one of bribes, not of
beauty. Paris gave Hermes an uneasy glance, as if to say “I’m not sure I can do
this.” But the god cocked his head to one side and smiled back reassuringly.
Finally, Aphrodite glided up to Paris, and she appeared as sex incarnate. With
each lithe step tiny bells jingled from her gilded sandals with a sound like the
tide flowing in and out on the shore at sunset. She peered at the handsome young
shepherd through silken lashes, and smiled as if she knew a secret. She stood
tall, with slender arms and hands, and her skin was as white as the first fall of
snow, but her eyes and hair were raven black and the sunlight played in her
tresses. Her flimsy dress molded her ripe breasts and well-rounded buttocks, and
hinted at further delights. The goddess leaned forward and breathed in his ear:
“If you choose me, you will win the love of the most beautiful and desirable
woman in the world.”
As her scent filled his nostrils, it suddenly seemed to Paris that this was where
his happiness lay, not in the hazards of war or rule. What had he, a shepherd, to
do with such things? This offer was more to his taste. “But who is this woman?”
he asked. “And what does she look like?”
“She is Helen of Sparta,” replied the goddess, “and she looks just like me. For
your eyes, I have made myself in her image.”
Paris forgot his lover Oenone, so certain was he of the truth of Aphrodite’s
promise. His mind was swept clean: there was nothing he wanted more than the
gift of Aphrodite, the weaver of snares. He indicated to Hermes that he was
ready, and the three goddesses lined up expectantly. Hermes solemnly handed
Paris the apple, and without a moment’s hesitation Paris held it out to Aphrodite.
Gracefully she took it, and with a smile of triumph. Then the four deities slowly
faded away, and Paris was left with no more than the certainty that something
exciting was going to happen, although he had no idea what form it might take.
The very next day Aphrodite’s gift began to take effect. Priam, king of Troy,
sent men out to search the countryside and bring back the most perfect bull they
could find for the climactic sacrifice of a festival that was being celebrated in the
city. The men chose a bull that was in Paris’ keeping, and out of curiosity he

city. The men chose a bull that was in Paris’ keeping, and out of curiosity he
followed them back to Troy. He was amazed. He had heard rumors of the
greatness of the city, the wealth of its merchants, the splendor of its walls and
public buildings, but the reality overwhelmed him. No sooner had he set foot in
the city, however, than his sister Cassandra recognized him, and began to shout
out: “He’s here! The bane of the city is here! We shall burn!” But though she
spoke the truth, she had been cursed by Apollo, and no one ever believed her.
They thought she was just raving, and her voice was soon lost in the joyous
babble of the festival.
As is usual all over the Greek world, the festival included athletic games, and
Paris, with his newly acquired selfconfidence, decided to take part in a few of
the events. He did extraordinarily well, beating even the local favorites, Hector
and Deiphobus—his brothers, if he did but know it. Deiphobus especially was
mightily displeased at being beaten by some peasant upstart; he drew his sword
and Paris fled for safety to the protection of an altar. But in the tussle Deiphobus
tore from Paris’ neck a talisman that he always wore, and Hecuba and Priam
recognized it as the token they had wrapped in their unwanted baby’s swaddling
clothes all those years ago. To his astonishment, the young shepherd Paris was
acknowledged as a prince and welcomed back into the fold of his family. He
could see that Aphrodite’s spell was beginning to work. In the joy of the
moment, Hecuba’s dream was forgotten.

The Abduction of Helen
But who was this Helen, the gift of Aphrodite to Paris? Who was this woman,
fated to be reviled down the centuries? She was indeed the most beautiful and
desirable woman in the world, but Aphrodite also had a hidden motive: Helen’s
father Tyndareos had omitted to sacrifice to her, and she cursed him, saying that
his daughters Helen and Clytemestra would be “twice married and thrice married
and yet husbandless.”
Tyndareos, the king of Sparta installed by Heracles, took as his wife Leda, the
daughter of the king of Aetolia; one of her sisters was Althaea, the mother and
killer of Meleager. But Leda was loved by Zeus, who came to her in the form of
a swan. And in time she gave birth to four children, two by two, a pair in each
egg. One egg contained the Dioscuri, Castor and Polydeuces, while the other
held Helen and Clytemestra.

Helen was conceived when Zeus took the form of a swan to couple with Leda.[61]
Castor and Polydeuces were inseparable twins, but there was one critical
difference between them. Polydeuces had inherited the immortality of his father,
but Castor was fully mortal. They were two of the greatest heroes of the Age of
Heroes. Together they joined the voyage of the Argo; took part in the
Calydonian boar hunt; defeated all-comers in the funeral games of Pelias;
stormed Athens to rescue their sister Helen after her abduction by Theseus.
Their greatest adventure was also their last. It began when they attended the
wedding of their cousins, Idas and Lynceus, to the daughters of Leucippus,
Phoebe and Hilaeira. When the Heavenly Twins arrived for the ceremony, just
one look was enough for the girls to change their minds. They left their grooms
dumbfounded and allowed themselves to be abducted by the handsome
strangers. As if that insult wasn’t bad enough, Castor and Polydeuces rustled
some of their cuckolded cousins’ cattle to pay Leucippus his bride-price!
Naturally Idas and his brother sought revenge. Suspecting a trap, Lynceus ran
swiftly up to the top of the highest peak of Mount Taygetus, from where he
could look out over the entire Peloponnese. And indeed with supernatural vision
he spotted Castor and Polydeuces hiding in a hollow oak tree, waiting to spring
an ambush on their cousins. Lynceus ran back down the mountain and joined

an ambush on their cousins. Lynceus ran back down the mountain and joined
Idas, and together they crept up to where the Dioscuri were hiding. And Idas,
who matched great Heracles for strength, drove his spear right through the husk
of the mighty tree and fatally wounded Castor.
Polydeuces leapt out and chased Idas and Lynceus to their father’s grave, where
they made a stand. But Polydeuces’ aim was true, and his hurled spear took
Lynceus in the chest. Idas tore his father’s tombstone from the ground with a
grunt and prepared to hurl it at Polydeuces, to bury him under it (the only way to
stop immortals)—and he would have succeeded, had not Zeus intervened on
behalf of his son and blasted Idas with a thunderbolt. And so Idas and Lynceus
lie beside their father.
Polydeuces returned to where his brother lay dying. Tears poured from his eyes,
and he prayed to Zeus that he might be allowed to die along with his dear twin.
Zeus hearkened to his son’s prayer, but there are some things that even Zeus
cannot do, and he couldn’t deny Polydeuces’ immortality. Nevertheless, he
found a solution, and shared Polydeuces’ immortality between the two brothers,
so that on alternate days the Heavenly Twins dwell in misty Hades and on bright
Olympus in the company of the blessed gods. As deities it is their pleasure to
protect sailors from the dangers of the deep, and sometimes they appear as pale
fire clinging to the masts and rigging of vessels.
But meanwhile, ignorant of the future, there was joy in Tyndareos’ palace, for he
had found a noble husband for Helen. Her sister Clytemestra was already
married to Agamemnon, the lord of Mycenae. There were, as can be imagined, a
great many suitors for the hand of the most beautiful woman in the world:
Odysseus of Ithaca, Menestheus of Athens, the gray-beard Idomeneus of Crete,
Ajax of Salamis, and scores of others. All were required by Tyndareos to name
the bride-price they would pay for his slender daughter.
By far the best offer Tyndareos received was from Menelaus, the noble brother
of Agamemnon. But Tyndareos was worried that, whoever he chose to marry his
daughter, the other suitors, proud heroes all, would cause trouble. So he made
them all swear not only that they would abide by his decision, without envying
the successful suitor, but also that they would, if necessary, take up arms to
defend the marriage. After all, Helen had been abducted once before, when she
was only a child, and she had not become less desirable over the years.
The suitors gave their word—the oath that triggered the Trojan War—and
Tyndareos declared that the winner was Menelaus. He was the lucky man who

Tyndareos declared that the winner was Menelaus. He was the lucky man who
would wed and bed the most desirable woman in the world. Not only that, but
Tyndareos also announced that, on his death, Menelaus would inherit the throne
of Sparta. He knew that his sons Castor and Polydeuces were destined for higher
things. And so it came to pass, for soon afterward Tyndareos died and Menelaus
became king.
*
Not many weeks passed before Paris set sail from Asia to claim his prize. He had
made no plans, beyond simply traveling to Sparta. Helen had been promised to
him by a goddess. It would happen.
As everyone knows, nobles feel themselves closer to other nobles, even those
from other cities and further abroad, than they do to the peasants of their own
lands. Some pledge formal friendship with one another—a network in case of
need. But even without such a pledge, it’s understood that if a stranger arrives at
your door, he’s not to be turned away, because he’s under the protection of Zeus.
And if the stranger is of the same social rank as his host, he’s to be treated well
and given the run of the house. By the same token, it’s the responsibility of the
guest to show his host only the greatest respect and courtesy.
So it was when Paris turned up at Menelaus’ palace at Sparta. He was made
welcome, and gifts were exchanged. Above all, Paris had brought gifts for
Helen, but it was not these that turned her head. Aphrodite had made Paris
irresistible to her. His exotic easternness, his strange accent, his rich clothing and
luxurious ways—everything about him fascinated her. And, for his part, he
found that Aphrodite had indeed shown herself to him as a perfect likeness of the
Spartan beauty. Passionate looks were exchanged, breasts heaved with sighs,
fingers tantalizingly brushed. The lovers knew they were destined for each other,
but made no further move, for fear of the wrath of Menelaus. And then Menelaus
was called away to distant Crete …
Paris and Helen lost no time. As soon as they were sure that Menelaus must have
set sail from Sparta’s seaport, Gythium, they plundered the palace and left. Paris
stole all Menelaus’ most precious possessions—his wife, his golden tableware,
his purple-dyed cloth. In the gods’ eyes, Paris had violated the sacred laws of
marriage and hospitality. He and his kin would have to pay. Justice would be
done, reparation made.
The lovers too departed from Gythium, where Paris had left his ships, and set

The lovers too departed from Gythium, where Paris had left his ships, and set
their sails east. In order to baffle pursuit, they lingered for a while on Cyprus and
the Phoenician seaboard, reveling in eastern luxury and in the love they bore
each other. But in due course of time Helen entered Troy, with death as the
dowry she brought for her new in-laws, Priam and Hecuba.

The Greeks Prepare for War
While the lovers were taking their long honeymoon in Phoenicia, the Greeks got
busy. The pretext for the mobilization of forces to attack Troy was the oath that
Helen’s many suitors had been made to swear: they were honorbound to help
Menelaus recover his bride, and they were the cream of the Greek aristocracy.
The Greek leaders were summoned by herald to bring their contingents to Aulis
by a certain date, from where they would sail across the Aegean Sea to Asia. It
was a massive expedition: over a thousand ships lay at anchor just off the coast,
while their crews and the fighting men took their ease on land. But then, they
would need a massive force to take Troy, one of the greatest cities in the known
world, and well supplied with allies from Asia Minor and beyond. Menelaus’
brother Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, was chosen to be the overall leader, but
he was accompanied by a staff of seasoned counselors and warriors.
But two of the greatest Greek warriors were reluctant to join the expedition.
Odysseus of Ithaca feigned madness, for he knew from an oracle that, if he
joined the expedition, he was destined not to see his home again for many a long
year. As soon as he heard that Agamemnon’s agents had arrived on his island to
summon him to Aulis, he yoked a plow team consisting of an ox and an ass. This
was crazy in itself, because such a team would hardly plow a straight furrow.
But, as if that were not enough, he then went about sowing salt instead of seed—
salt that would make the land barren. But one of Agamemnon’s agents was
Palamedes, second in cunning only to Odysseus himself. He took from the arms
of Odysseus’ wife Penelope their new-born son Telemachus, and placed him in
the field that Odysseus was plowing, right in the path of the plow. Odysseus’
ruse was exposed when he halted the plow to avoid killing his son; he wasn’t so
crazy after all. So he gathered his men and went to Aulis—but in his pride he
swore to avenge himself on Palamedes.
The other absentee was even more critical. Young Achilles had the potential to
be the foremost warrior in Greece. His mother Thetis had placed him under the
guidance and protection of the wise Centaur Cheiron. But then she learned that
her son was essential to the fall of Troy, and that he was faced with a terrible

her son was essential to the fall of Troy, and that he was faced with a terrible
choice: he could live a long but inglorious life, or he could go to Troy and die
young and renowned.

The wise Centaur Cheiron tutored young Achilles.[62]
Naturally, Thetis didn’t want her son to die. She removed him from Cheiron’s
tutelage, disguised him as a girl, and took him to Scyros, where he was kept safe
by Lycomedes, the king of the island. Achilles longed for glory, but agreed to
his mother’s scheme to give himself time to think: did he want it badly enough
to face certain death? The young prince’s presence was no secret among the
womenfolk of the palace; indeed, one of Lycomedes’ daughters, lovely
Deidameia, gave herself in secret love to Achilles. But whenever any visitors
came, everyone went along with the pretense that he was one of the king’s
daughters; he was known as Pyrrha, because of his fair hair.

daughters; he was known as Pyrrha, because of his fair hair.
But the agents Agamemnon sent to Scyros included some of the most clever and
cunning of the Greek leaders: Nestor, Odysseus, Phoenix, and Diomedes, son of
Tydeus, one of the Seven against Thebes. As is proper, they brought gifts for the
king’s daughters, but they had included among the cloth, perfume, and jewels
some marvelously wrought weapons and armor. The girls fluttered around the
gifts, trying out this or that item of jewelry or clothing—but one of the girls was
more interested in the weaponry. Quietly, Odysseus picked up a horn and
sounded the signal for danger. The terrified girls fled to their quarters as the
alarm rang out—but Achilles donned the armor, seized the weapons, and sprang
to the city’s defenses.
His true nature was revealed; he cast off his disguise with disgust and went
eagerly to Aulis with Odysseus and the others who had been tasked with
tracking him down. He accepted the choice of a candle-brief, but glorious, life.
And Deidameia wept, for she was pregnant, and suspected that she would never
again see her child’s father. Before long she gave birth to a boy, and called him
Neoptolemus.
So all the heroes and their troops and ships were assembled at Aulis—but still
the expedition could not set sail, for adverse winds kept the fleet pinned on the
lee shore. Then Calchas, the wisest soothsayer in the Greek army, told
Agamemnon that the wind would never abate until he had sacrificed his daughter
Iphigeneia to the lady Artemis, Mistress of the Hunt. For Agamemnon, after
bringing down a proud stag in a grove sacred to Artemis, had boasted that he
was as great a hunter as the goddess.
So Agamemnon, lord of men, sent for Iphigeneia from his rich palace at
Mycenae, saying—it was Odysseus’ suggestion—that she was to marry swiftfooted Achilles, the bright star of the Greek forces. Arrayed in her bridal finery
and with a lovely smile of anticipation, the girl set out, and her mother
Clytemestra sped her on her way, but no sooner had the girl reached Aulis than
she was bound to the altar and slaughtered. Blood was shed to betoken future
bloodshed; Death led the fast ships onward to Troy.

Agamemnon was compelled to sacrifice his daughter Iphigeneia, before he could
set sail for Troy.[63]
But first they were granted one more omen. Many of the leaders were gathered
together and saw it. A blood-red serpent slid from beneath an altar and up a
nearby tree where there were nine sparrows, a mother and eight chicks. The
snake devoured the birds, starting with the chicks, and no sooner had it finished
its meal than it was turned to stone. There could be no doubt that this was a
powerful omen, but the Greek leaders were at a loss to explain it. Again, wise
Calchas read the sign aright. It meant, he said, that the war would last nine years,
and only in the tenth would they take Troy. And so it came to pass.

The Greek Landing
The Greeks made more or less directly for Troy. One important stop-off point

The Greeks made more or less directly for Troy. One important stop-off point
was the island of Delos, where they picked up the three daughters of King Anius.
Dionysus had granted these three young women remarkable gifts: Oeno’s grapes
made limitless wine; Spermo’s grains of wheat and barley never failed; and
abundant oil flowed thick and green from Elaïs’ olives. Anius let his daughters
go with the Greeks to Troy, and the army’s supplies were taken care of for the
duration of the war.
As the Greek fleet approached the Trojan coastline, they could see that their
arrival was not unexpected: the Trojan army had come out to meet them, to try to
prevent their landing. Nevertheless, Agamemnon ordered the Greeks to continue
straight on, to try to force a landing. The ships’ prows crunched on the shingle of
the beach, and for a split second, pregnant with doom, nothing happened. For
there was a prophecy that the first man to touch the soil of Troy would die. But
then Protesilaus, the leader of the Thessalians, jumped from his beaked ship on
to the shore.
Back home in Greece, when Protesilaus’ wife Laodamia heard of her husband’s
death, she begged the gods that she be allowed just a little more time with him,
for they had been married but one day. Her request was granted. Hermes
escorted Protesilaus’ ghost from the underworld, and the two lovers were
together for a few hours. But when her husband left her again, never to return,
Laodamia made a wooden statue of him; she spent all her time with it, and even
made love to it in bed. And when her father ordered her to desist, and to burn the
statue on the fire, she joined her husband in death by throwing herself into the
flames. Protesilaus was cut down by Hector, the son of Priam and the Trojans’
mightiest warrior; but his death paved the way for a mass attack from the
Greeks. They all leapt from their ships with blood-curdling cries, and battle was
joined.
The first Trojan to die was the albino Cycnus, a son of Poseidon. Cycnus was
invulnerable to iron or bronze, so Achilles laid aside his weapons and throttled
the man to death with the straps from his own helmet; and as he died he turned
into a swan and flew off.
The force of the Greek charge was irresistible, and they drove the Trojans back
in disarray to the city walls. The Greeks had succeeded in their first objective
and established a beachhead. They made their camp on the shore by Troy, with
the farmland plain between them and the city, two miles distant. They beached
the ships safely near their tents, and protected the entire camp, ships and all, with

the ships safely near their tents, and protected the entire camp, ships and all, with
a palisade. They dug in, but no one expected the war to last long.
Once they had established themselves, the Greeks sent envoys under a flag of
truce to the city of Troy, to demand the return of Helen and to threaten all-out
war if their demand was refused. Agamemnon’s war council chose Odysseus,
Menelaus, and the herald Talthybius to head the mission to the city. The Trojan
counselors met, and the Greek envoys addressed them at length, warning above
all about the danger of hubris and asking them whether they really wanted to die
for Helen.
The Trojans listened mostly in silence, but Paris had bribed Antimachus to urge
the assembled Trojans to murder the Greek envoys while they were defenseless
in the city. Antimachus’ words met with approval among the Trojan counselors,
but noble Antenor, the king’s most trusted adviser, was disgusted at such a
cowardly and impious suggestion (for heralds are under the protection of the
gods). He spoke out sharply against it, and argued that Helen should be returned
to the Greeks—that she was not worth dying for. He failed to persuade the
assembly, but at least the Greek envoys were allowed to leave. Their demand
had not been satisfied, but their lives had been spared.
And so the first nine years of the war passed. Heroes fell on either side by the
dozen, and ordinary soldiers by the hundred; Priam, king of Troy and father of
fifty sons and fifty daughters by various wives, lost many sons, to his enduring
sorrow. This too is the inscrutable way of the gods. One of those sons was
Troilus, of whom it had been prophesied that if he reached the age of twenty,
Troy would never fall. Swiftfooted Achilles ambushed the lad outside the city as
he was exercising his horses. Ares filled the Greek’s soul. He dragged Troilus
off his mount, pulled back his head, and slit his throat.
A major loss from the Greek side was the hero Palamedes, unjustly done to
death by Odysseus, seeking revenge for his discovery on Ithaca. Ever ready with
all the deceptions required in war, Odysseus forged a letter from Priam to
Palamedes, offering him gold if he would betray the Greeks, and buried that
amount of guilty gold in Palamedes’ quarters. When letter and gold were
revealed, Palamedes was condemned for treason, and ritually drowned by
Odysseus and Diomedes. But Nauplius, Palamedes’ father, had his revenge: he
convinced Anticlea, the mother of Odysseus, that her son had died at Troy, and
in abject grief she killed herself.
Hector, Ajax (the son of Peleus’ friend Telamon), and the other leaders on both

Hector, Ajax (the son of Peleus’ friend Telamon), and the other leaders on both
sides distinguished themselves. Achilles more than fulfilled his potential, and
rose high in everyone’s esteem; at one point, he even managed singlehandedly to
quell a mutiny. The Greeks made gains, but never quite broke into the city; the
Trojan defense was solid and, although they were cut off from the sea, they were
able to supply themselves from inland. The Greeks were never able to put the
city under siege, and were forced to engage in an endless series of skirmishes on
the plain. They stuck to their frustrating task, but at the end of nine years of
unbroken warfare, the position was little different from what it had been at the
beginning.

Achilles Withdraws
Many prisoners were taken in the course of the war, to be made slaves or
concubines to their new masters, or to be ransomed for personal profit. Among
these prisoners was Chryseis, captured from a town allied to the Trojans, the fair
daughter of the priest of Apollo, Chryses. Agamemnon, lord of men, took her for
his own, to warm his bed and work his loom. Chryses made his way under a
truce to the Greek camp, and offered Agamemnon a generous ransom for his
daughter, for she was all that was left to him. But Agamemnon haughtily
refused, against the advice of his staff officers.
Chryses left in despair, and from the depths of his grieving heart prayed to
Apollo to punish the Greeks in their arrogance. By the rules of war a captor
should accept a generous ransom, and Chryses’ offer for his daughter had been
more than adequate. Apollo heard the plea of his priest and sent a plague into the
Greek camp. First the dogs and mules began to sicken and die, and then the
disease spread to the troops. Every day dozens more succumbed, until the
situation became critical: it looked as though, after all this time, the Greeks
would have to abandon their effort and sail back home empty-handed.
With the men huddled together in little groups, complaining that all they could
do was await a foul and pestilential death—with the men muttering defeatist
thoughts out loud for the first time—Achilles, at Hera’s prompting, summoned a
general assembly of the army. After pointing out how desperate the situation
was, the chief of the Myrmidons wondered out loud why Apollo, the god of
pestilence and disease, had made them the targets of his wrath.
He was answered by Calchas, the soothsayer. The plague would continue until
Agamemnon had restored Chryseis to her father without ransom, and made a

splendid sacrifice to the god. Agamemnon spat out his anger at Calchas, but, as
the commander of the Greek forces, he had no choice: the good of his men had
to take precedence over his own desires. He agreed to return Chryseis—but only
if he was compensated. He felt that he would lose face if he lost both girl and
ransom. “Of all the Greeks,” he said, “it’s unthinkable that I should be left
without my due.” Achilles vehemently pointed out that all the booty had been
distributed: there was nothing left in the common pool that Agamemnon could
claim as his own. “I am the commander-in-chief,” Agamemnon hurled back.
“I’ll take what I want, even if it’s something of yours! None of the Greeks is my
equal; I can do as I like!” He was claiming to stand to his subordinates as Zeus
stands to the other gods.
The quarrel grew ever more fierce, until Agamemnon declared that as
compensation for Chryseis he would take from Achilles his own favorite
concubine, the captive Briseis. Achilles was so enraged by now that he began to
draw his sword to kill Agamemnon, but Athena appeared to him and stayed his
hand.
Instead, Achilles cursed Agamemnon in the vilest language, and declared in
front of all the assembled Greeks that if Agamemnon stole Briseis from him, he
and his men, the fearsome Myrmidons, would withdraw from the fighting. He
knew how important he was to the eventual success of the expedition. It was not
just that he had killed more of the enemy than anyone else, but also that the men
had come to admire him. Not knowing that he was more or less invulnerable,
they were impressed with his cool courage. Agamemnon was taking a big risk in
alienating his most important ally.
Aged Nestor of Pylos, the wisest of the Greeks in council, tried to pour oil on the
troubled waters. “The Trojans would be delighted,” he said, “if they could see
you now. Agamemnon, please don’t try to take the girl from Achilles; and you,
Achilles, should not insult our commander like that. Respect each other, both of
you.” Good words, sensible words—but both men were too far gone in anger to
heed them. The assembly broke up in disarray, and swift-footed Achilles and his
men returned to their tents to see what would happen next. Patroclus, Achilles’
tent-mate and dearest companion, knew his friend well enough to be sure that he
meant what he said. Idleness would sit poorly with Achilles, but his will was
unbendable.
Agamemnon duly returned Chryseis and carried out the propitiatory sacrifice to
Apollo, as ordered by Calchas. But then he sent men to fetch Briseis from

Apollo, as ordered by Calchas. But then he sent men to fetch Briseis from
Achilles. The leader of the Myrmidons bade the envoys peace, because he had
no quarrel with them. But he reiterated his determination to take no further part
in the war. However badly things were going for his former friends, he would
neither take up arms nor participate in their war councils.

Agamemnon’s Dream
In his sorrow and wounded pride, Achilles called on his mother Thetis, who
came from the depths of the sea and sat beside him. She was highly favored by
Father Zeus, and Achilles asked her to persuade him to side with the Trojans and
tip the scales of the war in their direction, at least for a while. Then the Greeks
would learn how much they needed him.

Thetis knelt before Zeus and begged him to punish the Greeks for insulting
Achilles.[64]
Thetis recognized the signs that heralded the end of her son’s candle-brief life,
but she did as he asked. And Zeus agreed, though he knew it would get him into
trouble with Hera, who favored the Greeks; for Paris had denied her the golden
apple, and in claiming his prize from Aphrodite had violated the sacred bond of
marriage, which is Hera’s domain. But Zeus cowed his wife into silence, and
then he pondered. How should he ensure that the tide of war turned in the

then he pondered. How should he ensure that the tide of war turned in the
Trojans’ favor?
The gods take their ease and play with us men, and the mind of Zeus moved into
devious channels. He sent Agamemnon a dream—a lucid dream, so vivid that it
seemed beyond any doubt, but it was nothing but deceit. It seemed to
Agamemnon that Nestor spoke to him and said that the gods had lined up against
Troy, and that if Agamemnon mustered his men and struck at once, he would
easily capture the city.
At daybreak, Agamemnon summoned his staff officers to a meeting; Achilles, of
course, stayed away. He described the dream to them, and they too were
convinced. But Agamemnon was worried about the morale of the troops: the
plague had sapped their confidence, and the business with Achilles had done no
good either. If they were less than committed, the fall of Troy might not be as
certain as the dream seemed to imply.
This worry was the work of Zeus, his way of robbing Agamemnon of his wits
and undermining his powers of judgment. When Agamemnon next opened his
mouth, he found himself saying that he would test the men by telling them it was
no longer feasible for them to capture Troy, and that they should immediately
return home—exactly the opposite of what the dream had advised.
The war council called an assembly of the Greek soldiers. As thick as bees they
came from their tents, and Rumor blazed among them. Agamemnon addressed
them, holding the staff, fashioned by Hephaestus, that he had inherited from his
father Atreus, who had in his turn been bequeathed it by Pelops. As he had
planned, he counseled despair and defeat. If it was just them against the Trojans,
he said, their numerical superiority alone would bring them victory; the problem
was all the Trojan allies. They couldn’t win; they must break camp and return
home immediately.
Naturally, the thought of returning home after so many years of war found an
eager response among the men. Confused cries of joy filled the damp air and the
assembly broke up in disarray. The men scattered for their tents, grabbed their
belongings and their booty, and began to load the ships for departure. Up on
Olympus, Hera was appalled as she looked down onto the swarming shore. Her
favorites were on the point of throwing everything away. She sent Athena down
to Troy to see what she could do. The two goddesses worked in league, their
anger fueled by resentment over their rejection by Trojan Paris.

Athena found Odysseus dispirited. A cowardly retreat was not at all to his liking.
And in his mind he heard the voice of the keen-eyed goddess of war as she told
him not to give in to his despair, but to go among the men and try to halt the rush
for the ships. Odysseus needed no second prompting; this was just what he
wanted to do. He walked around the camp, and every time he came across an
officer he appealed to his sense of honor and told him that Agamemnon, for
reasons known only to generals, had suggested retreat only to test the men. But
every time he came across an ordinary soldier, he beat him across the back and
shoulders with his stick and drove him back to the assembly point.
So the men reassembled, but they were now seething with confusion and
discontent, and one of their number, Thersites, a notorious troublemaker, spoke
up for them. “It’s all right for you, Agamemnon,” he shouted out. “You’ve
gained plenty of plunder from the war.” And then he turned to the men and said:
“I think we should leave him here to enjoy his gold and girls, while we go back
home. He shows us nothing but contempt, but let’s see how he fights the war
without us!”
His mutinous words were warmly welcomed by the men, but Odysseus was
quick to act. He leapt at Thersites with his stick and pummeled him into silence,
much to the amusement of the fickle crowd, who a moment before had been
willing to give him a hearing. Odysseus then addressed the entire assembly, with
Athena at his side guiding his thoughts. He appeased the men by agreeing that
they were suffering hardship, but reminded them of the omen of the sparrows,
promising them victory, but only in the tenth year of the war. And now it was the
tenth year of the war. Nestor, whose advice had long been recognized as sound,
backed Odysseus up, and Agamemnon, restored to his senses, ordered the men
to eat, and then be ready to fight. Death would be the punishment for anyone
preparing to leave.
The men, with their morale recovered, roared their approval and dispersed in an
orderly fashion. But Agamemnon summoned his officers to attend the pre-battle
sacrifice, and selected a fatted ox as the victim. He prayed for swift victory, for
the destruction of Troy at his hands, little knowing how much more slaughter
and sorrow the next months would bring.

Menelaus and Paris
The Greek army formed up for battle, and the Trojans came out of the city to
meet them on the plain. The Trojans had heard of the disarray in the Greek

meet them on the plain. The Trojans had heard of the disarray in the Greek
camp, and were resolved to take advantage of it. For the first time ever in the
war they made a full-fledged sortie, instead of merely defending their massive
and impregnable walls, built by Poseidon himself. Everyone knew that this could
be the decisive battle, and martial cries disguised extreme nervousness.
When the two armies were almost within bowshot, Paris, heavily armed and
resplendent in a helmet adorned with leopardskin, got carried away by the
excitement of the moment, and shouted out a challenge. “Whichever of you
Greeks thinks he is the best, let him come and face me, one on one!” And
Menelaus, mindful of the terrible wrong Paris had done him, eagerly stepped
forward into the space between the battle lines.
Reality is different from fancy, and Paris shrank back in trepidation behind the
shelter of the massed Trojan soldiers. His brother Hector, the tamer of horses,
berated him as a coward and reminded him sharply that the whole conflict was
his fault. “It’s all right for you,” complained Paris. “You have a martial spirit,
while my talents come from Aphrodite. But you’re right, and if both armies will
agree, I shall fight Menelaus in single combat. In fact, let it be that the whole
war is decided in this way. If I win, I keep Helen, and the Greeks must leave. If I
lose, Menelaus gets back his treasure and his lady—not that she wants him any
more, now that she has me.”
Hector joyfully agreed: the war would be ended today! No more bloodshed! He
advanced into no-man’s land, and shouted out to the Greeks the deal Paris had
proposed. Menelaus had no hesitation in accepting the offer. The two sides
would seal the bargain with a joint sacrifice, and Priam himself was to witness it
and give his blessing to the pact.
When Helen heard of the agreement, she raced to the battlements to witness the
duel. Two great heroes would fight for her in single combat! It was thrilling! She
couldn’t even decide who she wanted to win! Priam and Antenor also came up to
the fortifications and surveyed the scene. In a fatherly gesture, Priam called
Helen over to him and spoke kindly to her, blaming not her but the gods for all
their misfortunes.
As they gazed out over the plain, Helen identified for the old man the heroes of
the Greeks: Agamemnon, the proud commander, standing in his chariot with the
sun gleaming on his armor; Odysseus, the master strategist, in his plumeless
boar’s tusk helmet; Ajax, who was exceptionally tall, and so terrifying to behold

in full armor that men likened him to Ares himself; bold Diomedes of Argos, as
furious in battle as a force of nature; Idomeneus of Crete, as sinewy as an
acrobat for all his graying temples; her former husband Menelaus, with his
horsehair plume waving in the breeze. She was puzzled, however, not to see her
brothers Castor and Polydeuces, for she did not know that they had died not long
after her abduction.
All the Greek and Trojan leaders convened between the armies for the sacrifice
and oathtaking, and Priam and Antenor were taken by chariot from Troy to join
them. The victims were slaughtered, libations were offered to the gods, and
Agamemnon offered up a mighty prayer for all the gods to witness their oath:
that Menelaus and Paris were to fight to the death, with the winner keeping all.
And as they poured their libations, all prayed that the brains of anyone who
broke the oath would be spilled on the ground as readily as their wine.
Priam returned to the city, for he could not bear the suspense. Odysseus and
Hector marked out the dueling ground, and cast lots to see whether Menelaus or
Paris would begin. Fate chose Paris.
The two champions buckled on their armor and seized their weapons. As soon as
they had taken up their positions, Paris hurled his spear. His aim was true, but
Menelaus easily deflected the missile with his shield. Now it was Menelaus’ turn
and, with a prayer to Zeus on high for revenge, he hefted his spear and threw it.
It whistled through the air and struck Paris’ shield straight on. Too violent for
the toughened leather of the shield, the spear ripped through and into Paris’
breastplate, where it lodged briefly before he shook it loose.
Menelaus leapt at his opponent with sword raised. He was looking for a single,
brutal, killing blow—but the sword shattered on the rim of Paris’ shield!
Disappointed, but not daunted, Menelaus roared and hurled himself at Paris with
his bare hands. He took a firm hold of Paris’ helmet and began to drag him back
to the Greek lines, choking him at the same time with the chin strap. And he
would have succeeded, but Aphrodite saw the predicament of her favorite and
caused the chin strap to break.
Paris had barely struggled to his feet when Menelaus seized a javelin and hurled
it at him. The deadly lance sped through the air toward Paris’ chest, and it
looked as though the young prince’s end had surely come—but Aphrodite
whisked him away, off the battlefield, and set him down, safe and surprised,
inside his house in Troy. Then, disguised as a serving-girl, she went up to the

inside his house in Troy. Then, disguised as a serving-girl, she went up to the
battlements and found Helen. “Come, my lady,” she said. “Your husband awaits
you in his chamber.”

Paris found that he was better suited for the bedroom than the battlefield.[65]
Helen recognized the goddess and spurned her suggestion. “Haven’t you shamed
me enough?” she cried. “Menelaus has beaten Paris, and now I belong to him
again. What would people say of me if I joined Paris in his bed now?” Though
Aphrodite is the goddess of sensual pleasure, she is a goddess, and her will is not
to be gainsaid. “Be very careful, Helen,” she warned. “Otherwise, I shall arouse
such hatred of you among both the Greeks and the Trojans that your life will be
unsafe whoever wins the war.”
So Aphrodite spirited Helen away from the walls and into Paris’ room. And
while the two of them lay in love, Menelaus searched and called in vain for his
lost foe. Nevertheless, it was clear that he had won the duel, and that by rights
Helen and his stolen treasure should be returned to him. By rights, the war
should be over, and on both sides men dared once again to dream of a peaceful
future and the resumption of normal life.

But the gods had other plans. Hera’s hostility toward Troy was not assuaged in
the slightest, and when the gods met in council in the lofty hall of Zeus’ palace,
she insisted that the war should continue, despite the mortals’ solemn oath. Zeus
was indifferent, but agreed to allow the war to carry on, once Hera for her part
had agreed that the next time he wanted to see the destruction of a city, she
wouldn’t stand in his way. So the gods toy with the lives of men.
Zeus sent Athena down to the battlefield, to carry out Hera’s plan to see the truce
first broken by the Trojans. She flashed down to the plain like a shooting star,
and men on both sides wondered what this omen might signify. But Athena
disguised herself as Antenor’s son and went in search of Pandarus, for she knew
he would obey her. “You will win praise from all Trojans,” she flattered him, “if
you were the one to lay Menelaus low. You are a great bowman! Pray to the
archer god Apollo, and let fly!”
Nothing loath, Pandarus had his men conceal him behind their shields, while he
bent and strung his horn-tipped bow. Then he notched a trusty arrow, the best of
his quiver, and took careful aim over the top of his men’s shields. With a prayer
to Apollo, he let fly, and the lethal messenger of death sped through the air. His
aim was true, but Athena’s job was done. It was enough that the truce was
broken; she did not need Menelaus to die as well. At the last moment, she
deflected the arrow so that, although it pierced the king of Sparta’s breastplate,
he was not mortally wounded. The blood flowed freely down Menelaus’ thigh,
but it was only a flesh wound in his side. Agamemnon summoned Machaon, the
son of the healer-god Asclepius, to tend to his brother. The skilled healer of men
drew out the barbed arrow, sucked the wound clean, and sprinkled it with a balm
prepared for his father by Cheiron, the wise Centaur.

Diomedes’ Day of Glory
With the truce broken, both sides began once again to don armor and take their
places for battle. Agamemnon reviewed his troops and called on them to be of
good heart, for Zeus would not allow oath-breakers to win the war. To each of
his senior officers he spoke suitable words of encouragement, or chided them if
they had not so far been as prominent in the battle as they could and should have
been. And so the two sides advanced across the plain once more toward each
other. Grim Ares urged on the Trojan troops, while Athena instilled courage into
the Greeks. And their immortal assistants, Fear and Hatred, sowed savagery in
men’s hearts.

The two sides met with the clash of shield on shield. Spears were stabbed
through or to one side of the tall shields, and men fell to the ground, blood
gushing from wounds. Groans and screams added to the clamor of fighting men.
Antilochus, the son of Nestor, brought down Echepolus of Troy, with a spear
thrust through the man’s helmet and deep inside his skull. Elephenor tried to
drag the body away, to find somewhere safe to strip it of its valuable armor; but
in so doing he exposed his side, and Agenor was quick to plunge his spear in the
Greek’s guts.
On and on the slaughter continued, but gradually the tide began to turn, as Hera
wanted, in the Greeks’ favor. Here and there the Trojan lines wavered, and the
Greeks yelled in triumph. Apollo urged on the Trojans: “Greeks are not made of
iron and stone!” he cried. “Cut them with a blade and they will bleed! And see:
Achilles, their greatest warrior, is not among them!” Again the battle became
finely balanced; and still the carnage continued. But Athena sought out Ares and
suggested that they withdraw from the battle, to leave the Greeks and Trojans to
get on with it by themselves.
Now it was the turn of Diomedes to excel, the son of Tydeus who died at
Thebes. He hurled himself into the thick of the fighting, and the noble brothers
Phegeus and Idaeus bore down on him in their chariot. Phegeus threw his spear,
but he just missed Diomedes’ left shoulder. Diomedes’ response was true; Idaeus
fell from the chariot and lay still. Phegeus reined in the horses and leapt down to
confront his foe, and he too would have died, had not Hephaestus cloaked him in
darkness. For their father was his priest, and the lame god did not want both sons
to die.
Diomedes was unstoppable. He was like a lion that descends on defenseless
sheep, or like a spring torrent fed by snow-melt, that sweeps all before it. Even
when Pandarus wounded him in the shoulder, Diomedes just had the arrow
pulled out by a friend and carried on. “Lady Athena,” he cried out in prayer,
“hear me now! Let me kill whoever it was who wounded me with his bow, a
coward’s weapon, for an archer stands far from the fray.” And Athena heard his
prayer and restored his strength. It was as if he had never been wounded, and his
lust to soak the earth with Trojan blood redoubled. But Athena warned him not
to try to battle any of the gods that appeared on the battlefield, except Aphrodite.
Man after man fell to the spear or sword of Diomedes as he hacked and thrust his
way through the Trojan ranks. Aeneas, son of Anchises and Aphrodite, saw the

slaughter, saw that the Trojans were being pushed back, and sought out
Pandarus. “We must get that man!” he cried. “Come with me!” Together they
leapt into Aeneas’ chariot, with Aeneas at the reins so that Pandarus was free to
wield his spear. “I failed with an arrow,” he muttered to himself, “but I shall not
fail with my spear. There’ll be no second chance for the son of Tydeus.” It was
terrible to behold, the two fierce fighters bearing down on Diomedes. His friends
urged caution, but Diomedes would hear no talk of retreat. He had already taken
one chariot as booty, and was eager for another, especially since Aeneas’ horses
were of the noblest breed. As soon as they were within range, Pandarus let fly
with his spear. The brutal bronze head burst through Diomedes’ shield and
Pandarus cried out in savage joy, but Diomedes had taken no wound. Now he
hurled his spear, and it arced through the air and came down on Pandarus’ face.
Right through the nose it flew, severing his tongue completely and shattering his
teeth, before projecting out from the bottom of the archer’s chin.
Aeneas jumped down from the chariot and stood astride the corpse, keeping at
bay all who would attempt to strip the valuable armor from his friend. But
Diomedes picked up a massive boulder, greater than any two men of today could
raise, and heaved it at Aeneas. It crushed his hip bone, and Aeneas collapsed
unconscious to the ground.
That should have been the end of him, but Aphrodite flew to the scene, cradled
her son’s head in her arms, and began gently to bear him aloft and away from the
battlefield. But now Diomedes surpassed even himself. Seeing Aeneas being
carried off by Aphrodite, he dared to give chase. And just as the goddess was
moving out of range, Diomedes bounded high in the air from his chariot and
wounded her in the forearm, piercing her precious robe that the Graces had made
for her. With a scream, Aphrodite dropped her son—but Apollo caught him
before he hit the ground.

Diomedes injured Aphrodite, forcing her to drop Aeneas and flee the battlefield.
[66]

Aphrodite fled the battlefield with Diomedes’ taunts ringing in her ears: “What
have you to do with war, lady? Flee from here!” She found Ares resting and
watching the bloodshed close by, for there was nothing he enjoyed more than
seeing mortals kill one another; the greater the savagery, the better. In truth, the
wound was not that serious, but it was more than the gentle goddess could
endure and, with ichor dripping from the gash, she begged her lover to lend her
his chariot, so that she could return to Olympus. No more fighting for her! For
her revenge, she would employ weapons with which she was more familiar: she
was already plotting to seek out Diomedes’ wife and make her fall in love with
another man.
Diomedes, however, was as determined as ever. He wanted nothing more than to
slay Aeneas and take his suit of armor as booty. Three times he made a killing
stroke, and three times Apollo warded it off. But just as Diomedes raised his arm
for the fourth time, the golden god yelled at him: “Fool! Do you dare to
challenge the gods? Give it up: there is an unbridgeable chasm set between us
and mortal men!” Diomedes backed away in terror at the god’s wrath, and
Apollo bore Aeneas safely back to Troy, where he was tended by immortal

nurses, Leto and Artemis. But Apollo made a double of Aeneas, and let the
Greeks and Trojans fight it out around the unconscious body.
Still furious, Apollo sought out Ares and encouraged him to re-enter the fray.
Disguised as swift-footed Acamas, prince of Lycia, Ares sought out the nobles
of Troy and urged them not to abandon Aeneas. And Acamas’ friend, Sarpedon
of Lycia, son of Zeus and grandson of Bellerophon, lashed out at Hector: “Are
you going to let the Greeks drive us back to the city gates? You Trojans aren’t
pulling your weight; you’re leaving us allies to do all the fighting, while you
stand like sheep. Come on!” And now the battle began to turn in the Trojans’
favor, with Ares moving among them and stirring them to ever greater exploits.
This was unacceptable to Hera and Athena, and while Hebe prepared Hera’s
chariot, Athena armed herself for war. Hera cracked her whip, the gates of
Olympus opened, and the two goddesses rode in glory down to the battlefield of
Troy. And they went with Zeus’ blessing, for Ares’ lust for blood sickened him.
While Hera rallied the Greeks, Athena found Diomedes resting. “Shame on
you!” she cried. “You are not the man your father was!” But Diomedes replied,
“I’m only obeying your command, my lady. You told me not to fight any of the
gods except Aphrodite—and now Ares is fighting for the Trojans.”
“I release you from your promise,” Athena said. “Go! Seek out Ares and do
battle with him!” And she herself took the place of Diomedes’ charioteer, and
rode to war with him. But she wore Hades’ cap of invisibility, so that Ares saw
only Diomedes approaching.
The god of war hurled his spear, and the god of war never misses—unless
another deity engages him. Athena deflected the wicked missile, which
ricocheted harmlessly from the side of the chariot. Now it was Diomedes’ turn,
and he shoved his spear at the war-god’s belly, and Athena put all her power
behind the thrust as well, and then pulled the spear out again, dripping ichor.
Bellowing with pain and rage, Ares flew upward to heaven. His screams terrified
friend and foe alike, for none had ever heard anything like it. Bitterly he
complained to Zeus at the impudence of Athena, but Zeus dismissed him with
angry words to find Asclepius and be healed. And he welcomed Hera and
Athena when they returned from the fray, for they had forced Ares off the field
of battle. Now it was man against man, Trojan against Greek, with no gods
involved, and gradually, thanks to the prowess of Diomedes and others, the

Trojans were being pushed back. The Trojan seer Helenus, son of Priam, took
matters in hand. He commanded Aeneas, now fully restored, to rally the troops
right by the city walls and make a stand. “And you, Hector,” he shouted above
the din, “go back into the city and get our mother Hecuba to gather the women
of Troy. They are to offer Athena a magnificent robe now, with the promise of a
munificent sacrifice in the future of twelve unblemished cows, if she will keep
Diomedes out of the city. The man is proving himself the equal of Achilles.”
Aeneas and Hector did as the gifted Helenus ordered; for when he was a baby,
snakes had licked his ears. He knew the languages of all creatures of air, earth,
and water, and animals make more reliable harbingers of the future than men.
Once within the city walls, Hector speedily carried out his errand. But before
returning to the battlefield, he sought a few moments with his wife Andromache.
He found her on the battlements with Astyanax, their son, watching in dread as
the fighting raged ever closer to the city gates and walls. As soon as she saw him
she ran up to him in joy; and the nurse followed behind, bearing the baby boy,
the light of Hector’s life and Troy’s hope for the future.
Andromache rested her head on the hero’s chest and begged him to be careful.
“You’re too brave for your own good,” she said. “Think of me! I have no one in
the world but you. Think of your son! You fight so well that all the Greeks want
to see you dead. What comfort will be left for your sorrowing family after you
have met your doom? The future holds only torment.”
“Don’t ask me to stay away from the battle,” Hector replied in sorrow. “I cannot;
I know no other way. I do as my fathers have always done; I live and die by
honor and shame. Troy will fall—this I know—and so honor is all that is left. I
shall be dead, but the worst of it is that you will pass into bitter slavery.”
Hector reached out his arms for Astyanax, but the baby burst into tears and clung
to his nurse. He was terrified by his father’s helmet with its nodding horsehair
plume and gleaming bronze. Both Hector and Andromache laughed, and forgot
the horror for a moment. Hector took off his helmet and swung his child high
into the air, and the boy squealed in delight. Hector kissed him, and
Andromache’s tears were mingled with smiles.
The fighting continued until dark brought rest to the weary combatants, though
all night long Zeus’ thunder rumbled in the heavens. In the morning a truce was
made so that both sides could bury their dead. The Greeks also seized the
opportunity to dig a trench and raise a rampart of earth and boulders to replace

opportunity to dig a trench and raise a rampart of earth and boulders to replace
the palisade that had been sufficient protection for their camps and their beached
ships while the Trojans were pinned inside their city. Too broad to be crossed at
a leap by a chariot, the trench bristled with sharpened stakes; and the rampart
was fitted with towers and well-built gates. And the Greeks indignantly refused
the offer relayed by the Trojan herald: though Paris would not return Helen, he
was prepared to return the treasure they had stolen from Menelaus, with interest.
As Diomedes put it: “Victory is within our grasp! We have no need of lesser
offers from our enemies!”

Hector Triumphant
At dawn, the working parties of both sides assembled on the plain to gather their
dead and prepare them for burial. If the corpse was that of a nobleman, it was
carefully washed, dressed in a shroud, and laid out on a couch. After a suitable
interval, the body was carried to the place of burial, accompanied by friends and
dependents, and by women weeping and wailing the ritual lament. It was then
reverently laid in the ground, to ensure safe passage across the River Styx and
into the halls of Hades.
Meanwhile, on cloud-girt Olympus, Zeus called a meeting of all the gods. He
chided them, and used the full weight of his authority, and the threat of eternal
imprisonment in Tartarus, to force through his will. No god or goddess, he
thundered, was to sneak away from Olympus and help either the Trojans or the
Greeks—not by fighting for them, nor even by giving them advice. He would
attend to this battle of mice himself.
The day after the mass burials, Zeus himself, father of men and gods, called for
his chariot and team of divine horses, and sailed down to Mount Ida, from where
he could survey the city of Troy and the Greek encampment and see that his will
was done. The morning passed in inconclusive fighting—though conclusive
enough for those who fell and died. At midday Zeus held up his golden scales
and carefully placed in each of the pans the doom of the Trojans and the doom of
the Greeks. The doom of the Greeks was heavier.
Zeus burst from Ida with lightning and thunder, and hurled them against the
Greek forces. No one could withstand the onslaught: Idomeneus, Agamemnon,
Ajax, Odysseus—all fell back. Only Nestor stayed on the field, because one of
his horses had been wounded by an arrow fired by Paris. And now Hector was
bearing down on him, and Nestor would surely have perished, if Diomedes had
not raced up and taken the old man on his chariot. Together they charged at

not raced up and taken the old man on his chariot. Together they charged at
Hector, and Diomedes’ spear soon found the breast of Hector’s charioteer.
Hector himself might well have been next, had not Zeus sent a blazing
thunderbolt crashing into the ground in a ball of flame before Diomedes’ chariot.
Seeing that Zeus himself was against them, Nestor cautioned Diomedes to turn
back. The Argive hero was reluctant: it seemed like cowardice to turn and run.
But he heeded his sage companion, and they wheeled around and joined the
general rout back to the safety of their camp, with Hector’s taunts ringing in
their ears. Three times Diomedes was poised to turn back and fight it out with
the Trojan, but every time Zeus emitted a warning rumble of thunder.
Hector was rampant. Shouting out encouragement to his men, he urged his team
forward, calling on the horses by name. He felt powerful enough to take the
Greeks’ new trench at a single bound and challenge the new rampart; he could
scent victory, close at hand. He could almost taste the smoke that would fill the
air from the Greek ships he would burn. He blazed like Ares, fearsome to behold
and deadly to his enemies.
Teucer, the Greeks’ best bowman, tried again and again to topple Hector from
his chariot, but failed. It was as though the Trojan hero were under the protection
of a god. Back the Greeks were pushed, across the moat, where they made easy
targets and many perished. Back they were driven, until they barely made it
inside the new rampart.
As night began to fall and the fighting died down, Zeus returned to Olympus.
Hera dared to chide him for stopping the rest of the gods interfering, but Zeus
was adamant. “Hector will never be checked,” he said, “until or unless Achilles
rejoins the fighting. And Achilles will rejoin the fighting only to defend the
corpse of his bosom friend Patroclus. So it is; that is my will.” And the gods
trembled, for they saw his plan: to place Achilles on a high pedestal of honor, as
Thetis had requested, and to punish the Trojans for their sins.

Envoys and Spies
Fear stalked the Greek camp. With the Trojans encamped for the first time close
by on the plain, everyone expected death and defeat the following day. Strong
pickets were posted to keep watch through the night. At a gloomy meeting of the
Greek staff officers, Agamemnon, a changed man in the face of defeat, agreed to
swallow his pride and try to placate Achilles. “I shall do as you say,” he said. “I
shall send envoys to Achilles, bearing great gifts: tripods, gold, women, horses,

shall send envoys to Achilles, bearing great gifts: tripods, gold, women, horses,
cauldrons. And I shall return Briseis to him as well, who was the cause of our
quarrel. She is exactly as he left her: I have not taken her to bed. And if, with his
help, we succeed in taking Troy, he will have his pick of the spoils and plunder,
until his ship is filled with riches. Then, when we get back home, he shall take
one of my daughters as his wife, and I shall make him a baron of my kingdom,
with extensive estates of fertile land.”
Everyone agreed that this was a generous offer, and envoys were detailed to take
the proposal to Achilles. The delegation, headed by friends of Achilles—old
Phoenix, Odysseus, and Ajax—made its way along the shore and found the
leader of the Myrmidons playing the lyre by his tent, with Patroclus as ever by
his side.
Achilles greeted them warmly and made them welcome with meat and wine.
Then they got down to business. Odysseus explained the situation: they faced
defeat unless Achilles would take up arms again and fight for them. Agamemnon
repented his rash actions, and would not only return Briseis untouched, but
would give him great wealth and honor. “This is no time for anger,” he
concluded. “Let generosity calm your wrath. Even if you still hate Agamemnon,
think of the rest of us.”
But Achilles’ heart remained unmoved and unmelted by Odysseus’ words.
Phoenix tried next, and then Ajax, but to all of them Achilles made the same
reply: he would never forgive Agamemnon. The only thing that could possibly
make him fight would be if Hector stormed the Myrmidon encampment and
directly threatened himself and his men. Otherwise, he said, he would embark
his men the next day and sail for home. The envoys chastised him for his
heartlessness in condemning hundreds of Greeks to certain death, but in his
terrible pride Achilles remained implacable.
Odysseus and Ajax departed in frustration, but Phoenix remained. He had been
Achilles’ mentor since the hero’s childhood, and felt it his duty to stay by his
side, and even to sail back home with him, at the cost of abandoning the rest of
the Greeks. When the returning envoys reported back to Agamemnon and the
war council, there was stunned silence, but Diomedes brought their attention
back to the present. They badly needed information about the enemy’s
intentions, and Diomedes and Odysseus volunteered to sneak into the enemy
camp and see what they could find out. They awoke before dawn and set out
across the plain, keeping cover behind walls and trees.

But the same idea had occurred to the Trojans, and Dolon, attracted by the
generous reward Hector promised, put himself forward. When Diomedes and
Odysseus were about halfway across the no-man’s land between the two camps,
they heard Dolon coming and threw themselves to the ground. They let him pass
a short distance, so that his escape route back to the Trojan camp was cut off,
and then raced after him. The cowardly Dolon offered no resistance. Quaking in
his boots, he told them everything they wanted to know. But once they had all
the information they needed, they cut his throat even as he begged for his life,
stripped him of his fine armor, and hung it in a tree to collect on their way back.
Traitors could expect no less.
Dolon had carefully described for them the precise layout of the Trojan
encampment, and had told them especially that a newly arrived contingent of
Thracians had bivouacked at a little distance from the rest. It was foretold that if
the white horses of Rhesus, the Thracian king, ate and drank at Troy, the city
would never be taken. Odysseus and Diomedes just had time. They crept silently
up to the Thracians as they slept, slaughtered a number of them as they lay
dreaming on the ground, including Rhesus, and stole the king’s horses.
Diomedes was tempted to stay for more plunder—Rhesus had a fabulous chariot,
decorated with gold and silver—but Athena whispered a warning to him. Just
then a cry arose: someone had discovered the bodies of the men they had killed.
They raced back to the Greek lines, pausing only for Dolon’s bloody armor.
Their material gains were slight—but the news imbued all the Greeks with new
courage, and that was worth more than a hundred horses.

The Assault on the Ships
At daybreak, Zeus sent Strife down to the Greek camp. The dread goddess
perched in the middle of the Greek encampment and let out a frightful wail, to
stir all the Greeks to action. The two sides advanced once more into the plain,
disturbing the kites from their horrid meal. Strife looked on with joy,
anticipating slaughter, while Zeus gazed down unconcerned from high Olympus,
for to the gods the activities of mortals are just sport. One generation dies and is
replaced by another; the gods play with all alike, as careless boys sport with
flies.
The battle was closely contested, but at noon the Trojan lines began to waver.
Agamemnon went on the rampage, sowing death left and right. And now
Antimachus paid dearly for his impious attempt to kill the envoys the Greeks
sent at the very beginning of the war to present their ultimatum. For

sent at the very beginning of the war to present their ultimatum. For
Agamemnon confronted his two sons in their chariot, and though they begged
for their lives, he held no pity for them, but slew them where they stood. As a
forest fire leaps forward, destroying everything in its path, so Agamemnon
carried all before him, and he and his men harried the Trojans back to the city
wall.
But now dark-bearded Zeus came down from Olympus to his vantage point on
Ida, with his messenger Iris by his side. “Deliver this as a message to Hector,” he
commanded. “As long as Agamemnon remains unhurt, the Greeks will dominate
the battle; but once he retires wounded, I shall grant Hector the power of
slaughtering the Greeks all the way back to their ships until nightfall.”

Iris, the rainbow messenger of the gods, flies from Olympus at Zeus’ command.

[67]

Beautiful Iris delivered the message entrusted to her by Zeus, and Priam’s son
heard it in his heart like an inspiration. He rallied his troops, putting fresh
courage into his men all over the battlefield, but still Agamemnon seemed
unstoppable. One after another he slew two sons of Antenor, leaving their
mother to mourn in her chamber. But at the moment of death one of the two
young men struck and gashed Agamemnon on the forearm. The Greek leader
tried to fight on, but was forced to leave the battlefield to seek medical help.
With a cry of encouragement to the other Greeks, he was gone.
Hector’s chance had come. He urged his men to greater efforts, ordering them
forward from the city gates, while he himself fell on the foe like a savage storm
at sea. Ten Greek champions fell before his spear and his flashing sword. Back
fell the Greeks, back and further back. They maintained good order, but all too
soon they found themselves once more hard by the rampart and their camp.
Diomedes and Odysseus were wounded and had to withdraw from the
battlefield. Even mighty Ajax found himself slowly being driven back, and the
same was happening all over the field.
Now, Achilles had been watching the action from afar, standing on the stern of
his beached ship, and he saw Nestor returning from the battle with a wounded
man in his chariot. He was disturbed, for it looked as though it was his friend
Machaon, the son of Asclepius, and he sent his tent-mate Patroclus to find out.
When the young son of Menoetius reached Nestor’s tent, the old king of Pylos
made him welcome, but Patroclus explained that he had only come to see
whether it was Machaon who had been hurt. Now that he saw it wasn’t, he
would leave. His carelessness provoked Nestor to anger against Achilles, for the
Greeks now needed him more than ever.
“Achilles’ father Peleus sent him here to perform noble deeds,” he said, “not to
sulk and skulk in his tent. If he truly will not fight, ask him to lend you his
armor, so that you may lead the fearsome Myrmidons into battle. The enemy
will think that you are him and their courage will fail. Otherwise, I fear, all will
soon be lost.”
Nestor was acting, all unwitting, as an agent of the will of Zeus. But Patroclus
liked the idea. He was moved to pity by the plight of the Greeks, and could see
how dire the situation was. He set out back to the Myrmidons’ encampment to
see if Achilles would agree. But on the way he met his friend Eurypylus,

see if Achilles would agree. But on the way he met his friend Eurypylus,
grievously wounded in the thigh by one of Paris’s barbs, and he stopped to tend
to him.
Meanwhile, the Trojans, foiled by the Greeks’ trench, decided to abandon their
chariots at its lip and press forward on foot. They formed up in five columns,
and at the head of each column strode a great hero: Hector for the first, then
Paris, Helenus, and Aeneas, while the allied column was led by Sarpedon of
Lycia. Each column advanced against a section of the Greek rampart that they
thought might be vulnerable—a gate, a stretch of less secure stonework. In
answer to Trojan prayers, Zeus, surveying the action from Ida, sent a cloud of
dust swirling into the Greeks’ eyes.
The Trojans pressed forward with renewed vigor, and began tearing at the
rampart with their hands, pulling away loose stones and earth and logs. But as
fast as they removed stuff, the Greeks filled the gaps with oxhide sandbags,
while raining stones and missiles down from the top of the rampart onto the
attackers, as thick as hail or a snow storm.
But now the allied contingents had demolished enough of the rampart in front of
them to try to clamber over it. Ajax and his half-brother Teucer ran to plug the
gap, and Ajax lunged with his spear at Sarpedon. Death would certainly have
met the son of Zeus had his father not protected him. Sarpedon was checked, but
not hurt, and the battle raged furiously but indecisively at this stretch of the wall.
Elsewhere, however, Hector found and lifted a mighty boulder, greater than any
two men of today could raise, and hurled it with all his strength against one of
the gates. The cross-bars gave way and the planks of the gate splintered and
burst. Through the breach Hector leapt, and his men poured in after him, while
the Greeks turned and fled. It looked as though he would keep his promise to
burn the Greek ships.
On Ida, Zeus saw Hector’s success, and felt that the day was won. He turned his
attention away from the battlefield, confident that no other god would intervene
in the action, for he had forbidden it. But his brother Poseidon, who had not been
privy to the deliberations on Olympus, took pity on the Greeks, whom he
favored because of his ill treatment at the hands of Laomedon. He took on the
appearance of the seer Calchas and rallied the weary and terrified troops. They
formed a compact phalanx, an impregnable wall of shields. Hector bore down on
them like a boulder rolled in a storm-swelled river, but even he was stopped in
his tracks by the massed spears and swords.

his tracks by the massed spears and swords.

The Deception of Zeus
Behind the lines, Nestor met up with Agamemnon, Odysseus, and Diomedes,
returning from the beached ships after tending to their wounds. For the third
time, Agamemnon counseled retreat, seeing that they could do nothing against
the will of Zeus, but Odysseus told him off disdainfully for such talk,
unbecoming especially in their commander. Following Diomedes’ lead, the four
heroes set out for the front; despite their wounds, they might give fresh heart to
their men.
But the matter was not in human hands, and never had been. With Poseidon
supporting one side and Zeus the other, the battle was finely balanced. And now
Hera conceived the desire to disobey her husband and influence the battle in
favor of the Greeks. The plan she came up with was subtle and certain. She went
to her chamber, anointed her body with a rare and irresistible scent, and dressed
in her most alluring robe. But still she needed to be sure. Calling Aphrodite to
her side, she lied to her, for they were on opposing sides in the war.
“I’m going down to earth,” she said, “to try to reconcile the ancient quarrel
between Ocean and Tethys. I intend to get them back into bed together. That will
do the trick.”
Aphrodite understood what she wanted and untied her girdle of desire, that
makes all who wear it irresistible and robs both men and gods of their wits.
“Take this girdle,” she said. “Tethys will find her lord more than willing.”
Hera smiled artlessly and took the proffered gift. Concealing it in her breast, she
flew down from Olympus to the island of Lemnos, where Sleep, the brother of
Death, has his abode. Offering to reward him with the golden throne that her son
Hephaestus had made, she told him that she was going to make love to Zeus, and
asked him to see that afterward Zeus fell fast asleep.
Sleep was terrified: “No, not I!” he whined. “Once before you had me put him to
sleep, while you blew up that storm to distract Heracles, and Zeus’ wrath was
terrible. I survived only because my brother Night hid me until his anger died
down.”
“It’s not the same thing at all,” countered Hera. “Zeus won’t be as furious about
the Trojans as he was about Heracles.” But, seeing that Sleep was reluctant, she
increased her bribe: “If you do this for me, I shall see that one of the Graces

increased her bribe: “If you do this for me, I shall see that one of the Graces
graces your bed.”
“Swear this by the River Styx,” said Sleep, “the only oath that is binding on the
heavenly gods. Pasithea is the one I want!”
Hera swore a solemn oath, and together the two deities set off for Ida. When
they reached the mountain, Sleep perched in a lofty pine, to avoid being seen by
the father of gods and men, the thunderer. But Hera approached Zeus, the magic
girdle slung low about her hips, and he was consumed by desire. He had never
wanted any woman as much as he wanted Hera now.
“What? Here, now, out in the open on the mountainside?” exclaimed Hera in
mock horror, but her almond eyes shone. “What if someone should see us?”
“Don’t worry,” replied her hasty husband. “I shall veil us in a golden cloud, that
even Helios could not penetrate.”
“Penetrate,” purred Hera. “Now there’s a word …” As they lay together, the
meadow beneath them bloomed with green grass and multicolored flowers. And
when they were done, Zeus lay back satiated, and fell fast asleep with his lady in
his arms.

Zeus has many lovers, but Hera is his divine spouse and queen.[68]
No sluggard, Sleep raced straight off for the battlefield and told Poseidon that
the coast was clear: with Zeus asleep, the battlefield was his to control as he
wished. The earth-shaker moved among the Greek troops, stiffening their
resolve, urging them to forget Achilles, arguing that Hector could not withstand
them if they worked together. In the guise of a Greek officer, he persuaded them
that the best way to defend the ships was to push forward.
And so it came to pass. It was Ajax who made the crucial breakthrough. Hector
lunged at him with his spear, but the point was deflected, and Ajax picked up a
rock, one of the great stones used as wedges to keep the ships in place on the
beach, and struck Hector with it on the chest. Stunned, Hector sank to the
ground, blood trickling from his mouth. He would have died then and there, had
Aeneas and Sarpedon not dragged him off the field, uncertain whether he was
yet alive.

Still the battle raged, but with Hector’s departure something departed also from
the Trojans’ hearts, as when a cat glides out of a room. Though they fought on,
secretly they began to cast around for some avenue of escape should they need
it. And slowly, like a tide just on the turn, they fell back step by step until they
found themselves back beyond the trench.
Just then Zeus awoke. He sprang to his feet and surveyed the battlefield below.
He saw the Trojans in retreat, and Hector stretched out unconscious on the
ground, with men huddled anxiously around him. He knew immediately what
had happened. “Treachery and lechery!” he shouted at Hera. “You scheming
bitch! Don’t you recall the times I’ve punished you in the past? This time I’ll
teach you a lesson you’ll never forget!”
Zeus raged on. Hera protested that it was not she who had brought Poseidon
back into the fight, but she could do nothing against her lord’s anger, and even
Poseidon relented, knowing that, ultimately, Troy would fall. Meanwhile, Zeus
sent Apollo to tend to Hector, and the healer-god had the Trojan hero on his feet
in no time. Hector’s miraculous return to the battlefield was greeted with joy
from his men and dismay from the Greeks, for they knew that only some god
could have healed him so quickly and thoroughly. And indeed Apollo led the
way before Hector, invisible, but bearing Zeus’ aegis, before which no man can
stand his ground. For thunder and lightning groaned and flashed from the aegis,
fearsome to behold and hear.
And so once more the battle swung in the Trojans’ favor, with the Greeks fleeing
pell-mell back toward their ships in the face of Zeus’ aegis. Once the Greeks had
crossed the trench, Apollo kicked at its banks to form a causeway across which
the Trojans easily flowed, as unstoppable as a flood tide. When they reached the
rampart, Apollo simply swept it aside, as a child wrecks a sand castle on the
shore. And now the Greeks had nowhere to go. Their backs were at their ships.
Their aching muscles now were animated not by courage but by desperation.
Men fell, dead or dying, and every moment that passed brought the end
unmistakably closer.
Then Hector, in the forefront as usual—for this was the day Zeus would give
him glory—reached one of the Greek ships and grasped its stern with his hand
while fighting off all who came near. He called for fire, but Ajax stood nearby
and slew all those who came close with burning brands. But even Ajax was
eventually beaten back, and then a dozen men rushed in and tossed their torches
into the ship, and flames immediately caught hold and licked around the stern. It

into the ship, and flames immediately caught hold and licked around the stern. It
was, as Fate would have it, Protesilaus’ ship.

The Death of Patroclus
This was the turning-point, the moment Zeus had been waiting for. His intention
always had been to allow Hector the glory of bringing fire to the ships, but then
to turn the tide against the Trojans. And so the din of battle, now so near, roused
Patroclus. He was tending Eurypylus’ wound, but he left immediately to see if
his tent-mate might have changed his mind. Now, surely, with defeat staring
them in the face, he would agree to Nestor’s plan.
“You’re a hard man, Achilles,” he said. “Surely Peleus was not your father nor
Thetis your mother. No, the cold, gray sea and the harsh cliffs were your parents.
But at least let me have your arms and armor, and a company of your
Myrmidons, to inspire the Greeks to fresh efforts, and to make the Trojans quake
at the thought that you have returned.”
Swiftfooted Achilles replied: “It’s true that the fighting is now close by, but I
swore not to take up arms until it reached my very camp. But I cannot hold on to
my anger forever. You may take my arms and armor, and my men—and do your
best, I pray. But you must not carry the fight to the walls of Troy; that honor is
for me alone. Beat the Trojans back from the ships—that’s all. And then return
safe to me.”
So, while Achilles told the Myrmidons to get ready and stirred their hearts for
the coming battle, Patroclus put on his friend’s armor, the wedding gift of the
gods to Peleus: bronze greaves with silver straps, a breastplate chased with stars,
the helmet with its terrifying plume, and the splendid shield. He slung the bronze
sword with silver studs over his shoulder and took two of his own spears,
molded to his grip. For no one but Achilles could manage his great spear, the gift
of Cheiron and the gods to Peleus.
Achilles’ charioteer, peerless Automedon, prepared the chariot and team, and
would drive Patroclus himself, so that for a while all should mistake him for
Achilles. With a prayer to Zeus—for victory and Patroclus’ safe return—
Achilles sent them on their way.

Patroclus and Achilles were beloved companions from their youth.[69]
Patroclus’ appearance on the battlefield terrified the Trojans, and the Myrmidons
under his command were fresh after days of rest. But for the Greeks, the arrival
of Achilles—or so they thought—was like the clarity that follows a storm, when
the light is pure and the air clean and easy to breathe. The Trojans fell back a
little way from the ships, but only to rally and prepare another advance. But
Patroclus led the Greeks on with blood-chilling war-cries, and they plowed into
the Trojan ranks, sowing slaughter. Every Greek officer killed his man, and the
Trojan lines began to collapse.
Hector could see that the moment of victory had slipped away, and he wheeled
his chariot and headed for home, calling for retreat. But the trench was not so
easy to negotiate on the way back, and soon it was filled with abandoned
chariots, horses screaming as they struggled to escape their shafts, and broken
wheels and bodies. The din was hideous. Now it was every man for himself, as
the foot soldiers fled in fear of being struck in the back or crushed under the
wheels of the chasing chariots, seeking desperately for safety, shoving friends
aside, tripping over fallen bodies. They were easy victims for the pursuing
Greeks, and the slaughter was immense.

Only one man had the courage to stand against Patroclus, and that was noble
Sarpedon of Lycia. The two of them vaulted from their chariots and prepared to
duel. From Olympus, Zeus watched the two heroes and mourned, for he loved
his son Sarpedon above all mortals then alive, and it grieved him that he had to
die. He was tempted to use his power to fly him safely from the battlefield, but
that would set an awkward precedent: all the gods would want to rescue their
favorites, every time they were threatened. But the ground received hot tears of
blood, shed by the immortal father of gods and men.
Sarpedon first hurled his spear, but his aim was off, and the missile flew safely
over Patroclus’ left shoulder. Patroclus made no such mistake: his spear plunged
into Sarpedon’s side, just below the rib-cage, and Sarpedon fell writhing into the
dust of the Trojan plain. He breathed his last as Patroclus tugged the spear in
triumph out of his body, trailing intestines on its bronze head. The Myrmidons
stripped the dead man of his armor and bore it back to their camp in triumph.
But Zeus commanded Apollo to collect Sarpedon’s corpse, wash it with river
water, and anoint it with ambrosia. And then the twins Sleep and Death were to
bear him home to Lycia, where his family could bury him with all honor.

With gentle hands Sleep and Death bore Sarpedon’s body home to Lycia.[70]
Darkness fell, but even so the battle raged on unabated in the gloom of an ill-lit

night. The Trojans strengthened their ranks, but still Patroclus bore down on
them in his lust for battle. Many great heroes he felled, and the Trojan lines fell
back. Carried away by success, Patroclus chased the fleeing Trojans toward the
city. He forgot Achilles’ orders to hold back, to leave the honor of assaulting the
city to him alone. The lust of battle was upon him, and it was easy to hunt down
the running Trojans, striking them in the back from his chariot, or in the face if
they turned to offer token resistance. He was like a raging forest fire, consuming
all before him. When he reached the Scaean Gate of the city, he hurled himself
at it three times in a frenzy, but Apollo repelled him, saying: “Back, Patroclus!
Troy is not fated to fall to you, nor even to Achilles!”
Just then Hector rode up to confront him, knowing now that he would face
Patroclus, and win great glory if he could bring down Achilles’ bosom friend.
But there was no glory in the fight. At Zeus’ behest, Apollo stood behind
Patroclus, wrapped in mist, and struck him sharply on the back. Achilles’
helmet, that had never before tasted dirt, tumbled in the dust; Patroclus’ spear
shattered in his hand, his shield fell from his forearm as the straps broke, and his
breastplate magically unbuckled itself. Euphorbus plunged his spear from behind
into Patroclus’ back. Gravely wounded, Patroclus began to drag himself to the
safety of his own lines, but Hector sprang forward and delivered the killing
blow, sealing his own doom.

The Return of Achilles
Achilles wept. He bowed his face and poured dust and ash over his head; he lay
on the ground, groaning and tearing his hair. He saw beneath the surface to the
pettiness and wretchedness of human life. All his womenfolk, the warprizes he
had taken, joined in the lamentation with their ritual cries. The ripples of his
agony spread until they reached his mother where she sported in the deep with
sea-nymphs. And Thetis knew straight away what the cry meant: that her son’s
time had come, that he would never return home. She hurried to his side, as any
mother would, to bring what comfort she might.
Achilles poured out his woes to Thetis: “My dearest friend is dead, the armor has
been taken that Peleus received from the gods the day he took you for his wife,
and now I know that I have little time left on this earth. I must turn my back on
life, for I must avenge the death of my friend and rip the life from Hector.”
“You’re right,” said his mother through her tears. “Your death will follow soon
after that of Hector. It is foretold.”

after that of Hector. It is foretold.”
“Yet even Heracles had to die,” said Achilles. “If glory such as his awaits me
after death, that will be enough. I regret my anger against Agamemnon; perhaps
I might have saved Patroclus’ life. But the past is the past. Now I look to what
brief future remains. It’s better to burn out than to fade away.”
“Don’t be too hasty, my son,” replied Thetis. “At dawn I shall bring you a new
set of armor, crafted by Hephaestus himself.”
Night drew over the plain, and the weary fighters disengaged. In the Greek
camp, all were mourning the death of Patroclus. Achilles swore not to bury him
until he had recovered the lost armor and brought back the head of his killer.
And he made a dreadful promise: to slit the throats of twelve young Trojan boys
beside his friend’s funeral pyre. Then they bathed Patroclus’ body and laid him
out on a bed, shrouded in white linen. And all night long Achilles kept vigil
beside the corpse, while the Greeks hardly slept, for they knew that on the
morrow their champion would rejoin the fray.

Xanthus and Balius, offspring of the west wind, were the semi-divine steeds of
Achilles.[71]
Up on high Olympus, Hephaestus and his assistants were devoting the night to
Thetis’ request for a new panoply for her son. By daybreak a marvelous work
had been wrought. The gleaming breastplate, greaves of layered tin, and closefitting helmet with golden crest were wondrous to behold; but the masterpiece
was the great shield. Five layers of metal made it safe: two of bronze on the
outside, two of tin on the inside, and a middle layer of gold.
On the face of the shield was shown the whole cosmos: the earth, the waters, the
heavens, and all the celestial bodies. Two cities were portrayed in fine and
intricate detail by the divine blacksmith. In one of the cities peace reigned, and
the people were celebrating festivals and going about their daily business; but

the people were celebrating festivals and going about their daily business; but
the other city was beset by foes, and scenes of ambush and treachery, of hope
and despair, seemed to flow before the eyes of the spectator. Nor was country
life forgotten, with its plowed fields and laborers, its cattle and flocks, orchards
and vineyards. Young men and women danced while a multitude looked on; and
around all lay impassable Ocean.
Early the next morning, Achilles received the gift with savage delight. Now he
was ready for Hector. He summoned an assembly of all the Greeks, and he and
Agamemnon were formally reconciled. Achilles apologized for sulking over
something as trivial as a captive girl, and Agamemnon expressed regret for his
high-handedness.
While the men took their morning meal, to give them strength for the day ahead,
Agamemnon had gifts brought from his tent for Achilles, the gifts he had
promised before: tripods, gold, women (including Briseis), horses, and
cauldrons. And the Greeks performed a great sacrifice to seal the reconciliation
in the eyes of the gods.
Achilles was too sick at heart to eat, and spurned all entreaties to do so. But Zeus
took pity on him, and sent Athena to infuse in him nectar and ambrosia, so that
he should not faint from hunger on the battlefield. Poised on the razor’s edge
between fury and despair, he donned his new armor, and pulled his great spear
from the rack, while Automedon yoked his team of immortal horses and
prepared the chariot once more.
Achilles mounted the chariot and called out to his noble steeds. For these two
stallions were the offspring of Zephyrus, the west wind, and Swiftfoot, one of
the Snatchers. “Xanthus,” Achilles called out, “and you there, Balius! Listen up!
Today I commend myself to your care. Bring me back to the Greek lines,
whether I am alive or dead!”
And Xanthus replied: “Yes, we shall save you today, Achilles, but the day of
your death draws ever nearer. It is your fate, and none can escape the doom that
is written for him.”
“No need to prophesy my death, dear Xanthus,” Achilles replied. “I already
know that I shall die here, far from home. But never mind that! Today is the day
I shall make the Trojans suffer!”

The Death of Hector
The next morning, the Greeks and Trojans again faced one another across the
plain—the same beginning as often before, but with the vital difference, to the
morale of both sides, that peerless Achilles was there, in the front rank, eager for
the fray. Meanwhile, on Olympus, Zeus the cloud-gatherer summoned an
assembly of all the gods, including Poseidon and all the rivers and nymphs. He
was concerned that under Achilles’ leadership the Greeks might sack Troy
before its time, and as a way of keeping things in balance, he gave the gods
permission to go down once more and support whichever side they liked, while
he remained on Olympus and watched.
As a result of the gods’ interference, the battle seesawed across the plain.
Gradually, however, Achilles gained the upper hand. Poseidon prevented him
killing Aeneas, and Apollo hid Hector from him, but by the end of the day the
Greeks had driven the Trojans off the plain and back to the city walls. The gods
returned to Olympus, except for Apollo, who hovered around Troy. He watched
as King Priam gave the gatekeepers a delicate task: they were to hold the gates
open for the retreating Trojan troops, while not allowing a single Greek to enter,
especially Achilles.
They did as they were told, but Achilles still might have burst into the city, had
not Agenor, son of Antenor, summoned up his courage. Despite knowing that he
was no match for the Greek hero, he confronted him and delayed his advance
toward Troy, giving his men time to make themselves safe. And though Achilles
aimed a killing blow at the young Trojan, Apollo hid Agenor in mist and swept
him from the battlefield to the safety of the city. Then he himself took on the
appearance of Agenor and kept Achilles occupied at some distance from the city
while the rest raced for the gates. Troy’s doom was delayed for another day.
All the Trojans were safe inside the city? No, not all, for Hector remained
outside. Though his parents, Priam and Hecuba, begged him from their vantage
point on the walls to come inside, to save himself, the very thought made him
ashamed. But now Achilles had extricated himself from his futile pursuit of
Apollo; realizing that he was dealing with a god, he abandoned the chase and
raced once more for the city gates. Priam saw him coming and redoubled his
appeals to his son, and Hecuba shed bitter tears, imploring her son to save her
from inconsolable grief. But war is a cruel master. Hector remained unmoved,
though in his heart thoughts of flight competed with visions of a heroic victory.

Inexorably, Achilles drew closer, hefting his great spear on his shoulder, his
armor seeming to glow. Finally, Hector could take it no more. He broke and ran.
Achilles set out after him, and he was famously swift-footed. Three times around
the walls of Troy they ran, pursuer and pursued, and gradually Achilles was
closing the gap, as a hound gains on a hind in flight. There can be no doubt that
he would have caught him, had Apollo not breathed strength into Hector’s limbs.
From the walls of Troy Priam and Hecuba looked on aghast and prayed
helplessly for their son’s life.
Up on cloud-covered Olympus, Zeus asked the assembled gods whether or not
they should let noble Hector be laid low by Achilles. But Athena rebuked her
father, saying: “How can you even think of releasing the man from his doom?
He is mortal; he would die soon anyway, but this day is fated to be his last.”
As Achilles and Hector began their fourth circuit of the great walls of Troy, Zeus
raised high his golden scales. In one of the pans he placed the death of Hector
and in the other the death of Achilles. Hector’s doom was heavier, and Apollo
immediately withdrew his support from the prince of Troy. Meanwhile, Athena
appeared to Achilles and told him to rest and catch his breath, for she would go
to Hector and persuade him to stand and fight.
No sooner said than done, and she appeared alongside Hector as his dear brother
Deiphobus. And Hector believed her when she said that she would fight at his
shoulder, that the two of them would tackle Achilles together and bring him
down in his pride, as two tawny lions work together to bring down a magnificent
gazelle.
So Hector stood his ground and waited for Achilles to draw close. Instead of the
usual taunting—for each knew the other’s lineage and prowess—Hector
promised that, if he should win, he would not insult or mistreat Achilles’ corpse.
But Achilles replied: “Does the wolf deal with the lamb? I’ll make no pact with
you. On guard!”
With these words he cast his long-shadowed spear, but Hector ducked and it
passed safely over his shoulder and stuck in the earth. Now it was Hector’s turn:
“You seem better at hurling words than spears,” he cried, but his spear was
deflected harmlessly by Achilles’ marvelous shield. He called on Deiphobus to
pass him another spear, but there was no reply, for there was no one near him.
And now he realized that he had been duped by a deity, and knew that his doom
was imminent.

was imminent.
Hector bravely drew his sword and advanced on Achilles, slicing the keen blade
through the air. Achilles adopted a defensive position, tucked in behind his great
shield, and once more hefted his spear over his shoulder; for Athena had
surreptitiously returned it to him. Hector’s armor—the armor he had taken from
Patroclus—protected almost his entire body, except for the neck. As the Trojan
charged forward, Achilles thrust his spear at the exact spot—a terrible wound,
but not enough to kill him immediately. Hector fell to the ground, choking on his
own blood, and Achilles stood in triumph over him. “Did you think you could
get away with killing Patroclus, you swine? The dogs and kites will rend your
body, while the Greeks honor Patroclus.”
In a bubbling whisper, Hector begged Achilles not to dishonor his body, to let
his father ransom it, but the Greek victor refused. “Ask me nothing, you whining
cur! I hate you with such passion that I could hack chunks from your body and
eat them raw! No amount of gold will stop you feeding the crows.”
So Hector died at the hands of a pitiless man. But inside Achilles something
slumped, and he spoke to himself: “It is done. Now I can accept my own death
when it comes.”
He called on his fellow Greeks to return to camp, leaving only a token force on
the plain in case the Trojans tried anything. After stripping Hector of his armor,
reclaiming it as his own, he pierced the dead man’s ankles, drew strong cord
through the holes, and tied the body to his chariot. So he drove back to the Greek
camp, defiling the body of his foe, dragging it over the rocky plain, breaking
every one of its bones, disregarding the laws of gods and men.

Achilles defiled the body of Hector by dragging it behind his chariot.[72]
Priam and Hecuba, looking down from the walls, saw their son’s death, and
collapsed to the ground, broken by grief. But Andromache still knew nothing.
She was in the chambers she shared with her husband, drawing a bath for him to
enjoy when he returned from battle. But then the sound of Hecuba’s wailing
reached her, and she ran in trepidation to see what had happened.
She arrived just in time to see Achilles dragging Hector’s body toward the ships.
The sight caused her to fall in a faint to the floor, but the wailing of her parents
and the womenfolk roused her. She mourned equally for herself and her
fatherless son. Neither of them now had anything to hope for. Their lives had
fled with Hector’s.

Two Funerals
Night fell and, with his vengeance complete, Achilles let grief possess him. In
the night Patroclus appeared to him, begging for an early funeral so that he could
cross the Styx into Hades. In his dream, Achilles stretched out his hands for his
friend, but grasped only mist and air. And the next day the Greeks forgot war

friend, but grasped only mist and air. And the next day the Greeks forgot war
and devoted themselves to the funeral rites for one they had loved and honored.
Men collected firewood and heaped it on the shore. Achilles’ womenfolk
prepared Patroclus’ body, and Achilles himself bore it and laid it on the pyre. He
cropped his hair in mourning and closed Patroclus’ hands around the golden
tresses. Sheep were sacrificed, and the corpse smeared with fat. Four horses
were killed and their bodies added to the pyre, and two fine hounds, and all
twelve of the Trojan youths Achilles had captured the previous day, their throats
slit. Then Achilles thrust the burning brand into the pyre, and the hungry flames
consumed all. And he swore that Hector’s body should receive no such funeral,
but should be food for dogs and crows.
The following day, the Greeks damped down the glowing coals of the fire with
wine, sifted the ash for Patroclus’ bones, and sealed them in an urn. Achilles
reverently laid the urn in the ground and surrounded it with all those things that
were dear to his dearest friend, and whatever he would need for his final journey.
Then all the Greeks heaped up a vast mound of protective earth over the bones,
and turned in his honor to athletic competition, as was the custom.
But the games did little to settle Achilles’ anger with Patroclus’ killer. Still his
heart was racked with bitter grief. Time and again he harnessed his chariot in the
dawn’s gray light to drag Hector’s body around the newly constructed tomb,
seeking to calm his restless spirit that way. But each day Apollo refreshed and
restored the mutilated corpse.
The gods looked on from high Olympus in abhorrence at this transgression of
sacred custom. For a while, the opposition of Hera and her allies created a
stalemate, but Zeus, as always, had the deciding vote, and he issued a direct
command: Achilles is to return Hector’s body to Priam. He summoned Thetis, to
ask her to make her son see reason, or risk the anger of the gods. And he sent Iris
to Priam, to tell him that the way was clear for him to ransom his dear son’s
body.
Thetis found her son still wrapped in inconsolable sadness over the death of his
friend, and exhausted by sleeplessness and savagery. But he readily obeyed
Zeus’ command: he would let Priam have Hector’s body. He put aside the
thought that he was somehow doing Patroclus a disservice by returning the body.
Meanwhile, Iris told Priam to go alone and secretly to Achilles’ tent, with
valuable gifts for the ransom, taking only a driver for the cart; and she told him
not to worry about the danger, because Zeus would send Hermes himself, the

not to worry about the danger, because Zeus would send Hermes himself, the
wayfinder, to guide him. She found the king begrimed with dust and earth that
he had poured over his head and body in his grief, and all the womenfolk of the
palace in deep mourning.
Hecuba thought her husband had lost his mind, but, trusting in Zeus, Priam was
determined to go. He ordered a great wagon loaded with bolts of the finest cloth,
ten talents of gold, tripods, cauldrons, and a gorgeous golden cup of the finest
Thracian workmanship. When they reached the ford across the Scamander, they
were met by Hermes in the guise of a young Myrmidon from Achilles’ camp.
Safely he guided the old man through the Greek picket lines, by the simple
expedient of putting the sentries to sleep.
So Priam completed his terrifying journey and entered Achilles’ quarters. The
son of Peleus greeted him kindly, and the old man dropped to the floor and
tearfully begged the warrior to pity his old age and grant him the right to take his
son’s body back to Troy. Achilles gently raised the old man to his feet and bade
him sit down, but Priam said that he could never rest while Hector’s body lay
unburied and dishonored.

Priam made his way in secret to beg Achilles for Hector’s body.[73]

Achilles’ temper flared at the suggestion that he had acted in a dishonorable
manner, but he accepted the ransom and had all the valuables taken from the cart
and stored in his quarters. Then he had his womenfolk bathe and anoint the
corpse, and dress it in fine linen. He suggested that Priam spend the night in his
quarters, and wait for daylight to make his way back across the plain to Troy.
And for the first time since his son’s death Priam felt able to sleep for a few
hours, calmed by Achilles’ assurance that the period required for Hector’s
funeral rites should be an armistice, untainted by war.
But in the middle of the night, while Achilles lay asleep, Hermes appeared again
to Priam and urged him to arise and leave, in case word reached Agamemnon or
one of the other Greek officers that the king of Troy was in their camp, and
could easily be taken. Priam got ready in silence, and Hermes guided him back
to the Scamander, where he took his leave and returned to Olympus. Priam, head
bowed and covered, drove the cart slowly home along familiar lanes.
At the sight of Hector’s body, trundling toward the city in the dawn’s early light,
all gave in to grief and mourning. Women tore their hair and raked their nails
down their cheeks, while sighing bitterly when they thought what they had lost
and what the future held for them. Andromache was utterly disconsolate, and
young Astyanax wailed constantly, oppressed by the mood and his mother’s
tears.
Achilles arranged a truce as promised, and the citizens of Troy piled up wood for
nine days. On the tenth they carried Hector out of the city gates to his pyre and
burned him with all honor. With tears streaming down their cheeks, they
gathered his bones and sealed them in a jar of gold. They placed the jar inside a
deep-dug grave, and heaped up stones and a mound of earth over the remains.
And so they buried Hector, breaker of horses.

The Death of Achilles
All too soon, after the funeral truce, armor was once again donned, weapons
once more straightened, sharpened, and burnished. Now reinforcements were
arriving for the Trojans from the ends of the earth. From the north came a
contingent of the wild warrior women, the Amazons; from the south came
Memnon of Ethiopia. The war was not over yet.
The Amazons were led by Penthesilea, a daughter of Ares, who was eager for
glory in a war against men. She and her troop displayed great valor on the

battlefield, and took many Greek lives, but then Penthesilea met Achilles. The
duel was brief: Achilles’ spear soon found her breast. But when the Greek hero
removed the dying woman’s helmet, he fell in love with her. He refused her
burial, and kept the body by his side in his tent. Thersites, the crude
troublemaker of the Greek army, made lewd suggestions about what Achilles got
up to with the corpse, and paid for his insults with his life. But Diomedes was
Thersites’ kinsman, and he and Achilles fell out over the murder, until their
fellow officers and aristocrats reconciled them. They did not want to see
Achilles go off in another sulk. Nevertheless, he had to leave for a while, to be
purified for the murder.
Memnon of Ethiopia was a giant of a man, the son of Eos and Tithonus,
equipped with armor made especially for him in Hephaestus’ workshop. He and
his men cut swathes through the Greek troops, and confined them once again to
their encampment. In the course of the Greek rout, Paris wounded one of the
horses of Nestor’s chariot team. The old man couldn’t make it back to the Greek
lines; his charioteer was dead, and he was caught in no-man’s land. Just then,
Memnon approached, and it seemed as though the Greeks would lose their most
respected counselor—but Antilochus, Nestor’s son, stepped up and took
Memnon’s blow in his father’s stead, and his head rolled in the dust.
Antilochus’ sacrifice gave Achilles time to rescue Nestor from Memnon. The
two heroes faced each other, battle fury disfiguring their faces. As they hefted
their spears, up on Olympus the two mothers were begging Zeus for the lives of
their sons. Once again Zeus raised the golden scales of fate. The death of
Memnon was heavier, and Achilles slew him. Eos had not been able to save her
son’s life, but she implored Zeus for a special boon. And the father of gods and
men turned the smoke from Memnon’s funeral pyre into birds, which fought in
mid-air, and fell dead into the flames as offerings to the hero.
But the slaying of Memnon was Achilles’ last great deed. His death had often
been foretold. He knew it, and he had made his choice, the heroic choice. After
Memnon’s death, the Trojans had no fighters to match the remaining Greek
heroes, and they found themselves hard pressed. Achilles burst into the city at
the head of his men, and the city seemed certain to fall—but this was the day of
Achilles’ doom, not Troy’s. Apollo the archer himself took the form of Paris, no
mean bowman even without the god’s help. Paris aimed for the body, but Apollo
knew better, and steered the fatal dart onto Achilles’ ankle, the only place where
his skin could be pricked. And though it was only an ankle wound, all his

vulnerability was located there, and his life ebbed away on the threshold of the
city.
A terrible fight arose over the hero’s body, with every Trojan determined to win
for himself Achilles’ fabulous armor. Glaucus, the leader of the Lycians since
Sarpedon’s death, beat back the Greeks, wounding even Diomedes in the fracas,
and managed to attach a rope to Achilles’ leg; but even as he was dragging the
body deeper into Troy, Ajax struck him dead with one mighty thrust of his spear.
On and on the battle raged, until night was drawing near, and Zeus sent a
thunderous storm to break it up. Then at last mighty Ajax managed to bear
Achilles, armor and all, back to their camp.
Antilochus was buried with all honor, while Achilles’ body lay long in state. All
the Greeks paid their respects, but Thetis and the Muses keened and wailed by
the fair corpse, on which no mark of a wound could be seen. After his body had
been cremated and his bones collected, they were placed in the same urn as those
of Patroclus and covered by a great mound of earth. For the funeral games,
Thetis extracted prizes from the gods themselves. And ever after Achilles is
worshipped at the site of his tomb as a hero.
But a far more bitter contest awaited the Greeks as a result of Achilles’ death.
Both Odysseus and Ajax coveted his armor, and each claimed a right to it on the
same grounds: that he was the foremost warrior in the Greek army. In order to
decide the quarrel, the army assembled and heard both Odysseus and Ajax state
their cases. Trojan prisoners bore witness that Odysseus had done them more
harm than Ajax, but even so the Greeks’ vote was exactly tied. There was
nothing to tell between the two of them in terms of valor. But Athena was the
presiding judge, and she decided for Odysseus, her favorite.
This loss was more than Ajax could stand; it drove him out of his mind. He left
the assembly staggering like a drunkard, and everyone kept out of his way in
fear. They watched as Ajax fell on a flock of sheep, butchering the defenseless
beasts in their pen, for he saw them as his enemies, those who had cheated him
out of his prize, and was determined to have his revenge. When the hero came to
his senses and saw what he had done, the disgrace was the final straw. On the
secluded beach, he planted his sword hilt in the sand and fell forward onto the
blade.

Dishonored, Ajax planted his sword hilt-first and fell upon the blade.[74]

The Wooden Horse
Now Troy’s end was close, and the Greek army had complete control of the
plain. The Trojans were bottled up inside the city, too scared to show their faces,
anticipating death or slavery within a few days. Odysseus captured Helenus and
forced the soothsayer to reveal the final conditions that would have to be met
before Troy could fall. First, Neoptolemus would have to be fetched from the
island of Scyros, and Philoctetes from Lemnos; second, the city’s magical
talisman would have to be stolen.
Neoptolemus, the son Deidameia had conceived while Achilles was hiding,
would act as a kind of substitute for his father, for though very young in years,
the gods had smiled on his youth and had raised him well before his time to the
prime of young manhood. Philoctetes was needed because he was the bearer of
Heracles’ bow, passed down to him by his father Poeas, and it was foretold that
Troy would not fall except with the help of Heracles’ bow. But more difficult
than fetching either of these two was Helenus’ other condition: Troy could never
be sacked as long as the Palladium was safe inside its walls. This was an effigy
of Athena that had fallen long ago from the skies, and was the most sacred object
in Troy. It was kept in the heart of the city, and cast a protective ring all around.
Odysseus fetched Neoptolemus from Scyros. On arriving, the young hero spent
several hours of silent grief at the tomb of the father he had never known, and
ended by swearing revenge. In battle, he performed great deeds of valor, and put
heart into the Greek troops, for he was the very image of his golden father.
Odysseus gave him Achilles’ armor, and the young man blazed on the battlefield

Odysseus gave him Achilles’ armor, and the young man blazed on the battlefield
like a savage new star.
With Neoptolemus in action, Agamemnon felt he could spare Odysseus and
Diomedes to go and fetch Philoctetes. Now, Philoctetes was a mighty warrior,
and had sailed as eagerly as any Greek to do battle at Troy. But on the way,
when the fleet stopped at the island of Lemnos, he had been bitten on the foot by
a snake, and the festering wound became so foul and smelly that the Greeks
abandoned him there.
Ten years later, then, Diomedes and Odysseus returned to Lemnos to bring
Philoctetes to Troy. They found him still in agony, with his foot still oozing evilsmelling slime. Nor was he pleased at having been left for so long on his own,
and over the long years of bitter waiting he had fanned the flames of resentment
of Agamemnon and the other Greeks. So while Diomedes hid, Odysseus
appeared to Philoctetes as a stranger, with Athena’s help. He won Philoctetes’
trust and sneaked the bow away to Diomedes when the opportunity arose.
Philoctetes was furious at the deception, but Odysseus, now revealed in his true
form, assured him that, if he accompanied them to Troy, he would win great
fame, and his foot would be healed.
And so it happened. Philoctetes was greeted with great joy by the Greeks, and
once Machaon had healed his wound, he was put immediately to work. In the
course of their very next assault on the city, the two great bowmen, Philoctetes
and Paris, squared off against each other. Thick and fast their arrows flew
through the air. But in the hands of Philoctetes Heracles’ bow was invincible,
and Paris fell, his corpse bristling with arrows. There were those, even in Troy,
whose tears were blended with relief that the cause of the war had been
punished. At any rate, with Paris’ death, the heart went out of the Trojans.
Heracles’ bow had effectively brought the war to an end.
Troy was now under close assault, the end inevitable and imminent. But first the
Greeks had to gain the sacred Palladium. Odysseus and Diomedes volunteered to
enter the city and try to steal it. Their disguises had to be perfect: they both
dressed in rags as beggars, and Odysseus even had himself beaten up for the
occasion. They approached the city by night and, while Diomedes kept watch
outside, Odysseus crawled through a drain that ran out under the walls.
But fear of the future was keeping Helen awake, and she too was out in the
streets at night. She bumped into Odysseus and recognized him in spite of his

disguise. But she saw a way to ingratiate herself with the Greeks, into whose
hands she was sure she would soon fall, and directed Odysseus to where the
sacred relic was kept. First and last, Helen was the bane of Troy. Odysseus
carried the effigy out to Diomedes and together they bore it in triumph back to
the Greek camp. Trojan morale plummeted even further at the theft, but in order
to calm their fears, Priam gave out that it was not the real Palladium that had
been stolen, but a fake.

Wounded Philoctetes and the bow of Heracles were retrieved from Lemnos.[75]
Now the Greeks were ready for their final ruse; now Zeus’ will would be
fulfilled. It was Athena’s idea, whispered in the mind of Odysseus. The Greeks
constructed an enormous horse out of wood, big enough to hold the cream of the
Greek heroes. Odysseus, Diomedes, Neoptolemus, Menelaus, and many others
took their places inside, in eager anticipation. The Greeks then burned their
camp and sailed away out of sight—but only just out of sight: they hid on the far
side of the nearby island of Tenedos, and waited for the signal.
After some hours of inaction, the Trojans cautiously emerged from the city to
see what was going on. They were astonished to find the Greek camp abandoned
and destroyed. The only solid structure standing amidst the litter was this
enormous wheeled horse. What was it? What should they do with it? Now the
next part of the trap was sprung. The Greeks had left behind a man called Sinon,
who was, as planned, taken prisoner by the Trojans.

who was, as planned, taken prisoner by the Trojans.
Feigning terror, Sinon told them that he hated the Greek nobles, and was so
hated by them in return that they had left him behind. To the Trojans’ questions
about the horse, he replied that it was an offering to Athena, and that the Greeks
had made it so large to prevent its being taken into the city. An oracle had told
them, he lied, that if the horse entered the city of Troy, it would keep the city
safe forever.
The Trojans debated what to do. The majority wanted to bring the offering
inside, to keep the city safe, but there were dissenting voices. Cassandra knew it
for what it was, and tried to warn her fellow citizens, but as usual her truths were
taken for the ravings of a madwoman. And Laocoön, Antenor’s son and the
priest of Apollo, was so suspicious that he hurled a spear into the side of the
horse. It stuck there, quivering, and the structure emitted a hollow clang, but
nobody recognized what that meant.
Then two vast serpents emerged from the sea and coiled their sinewy strength
around Laocoön and his two sons, crushing them to death. That seemed decisive.
Laocoön had died, people supposed, because he had opposed the will of the
gods. No more talk of setting fire to the horse, or pushing it over a cliff. Now
they were resolved to bring it into the city. They pulled down a section of the
walls to allow the thing to be trundled inside—that is how sure they were that
the war was over. In actual fact, what had been foretold was that the city would
never fall unless by a kind of suicide. The Trojans themselves had to be
responsible for their city’s fall.

Laocoön and his sons were destroyed for doubting the Wooden Horse.[76]

The Fall of Troy
The horse was left for the night in the main square of the city. Among the
curious sightseers were Helen and Deiphobus. Three times they circled the
strange structure, and Helen called out to each of the Greek leaders by name,
making her voice sound like those of their wives. But inside the horse, under
Odysseus’ leadership, the men maintained strict silence. They were not even
wearing metal armor. The Trojans, all unsuspecting, gave themselves over to
wine and celebration, and slept well. But Helen knew what would happen on the
morrow, and spent the night with her maids, preparing for departure.
In the silence of deep night, the Greek fighters silently opened the secret

In the silence of deep night, the Greek fighters silently opened the secret
doorway set into the horse’s side, let down a rope, and slipped into the dark
streets of the city. Stealthily, the assassins went their separate ways. Meanwhile,
alerted by the beacon Sinon lit at the tomb of Achilles, the Greek forces silently
returned from Tenedos. As the numberless stars wheeled overhead, the Greeks
poured in through the new, self-inflicted breach in the walls.
Neoptolemus sneaked into the royal palace, and found everyone asleep, from the
king down to his servants, whom he cut down at their posts. Alerted by the
noise, Priam raced on aged legs to take refuge at the altar of Zeus, but
Neoptolemus dragged him away. He forced the old man to his knees, pulled
back his grizzled head, and drew his blade sharply across the exposed throat.
Meanwhile, Odysseus and Menelaus went to Deiphobus’ house. They would
find Helen there, for, in accordance with Trojan custom, she had been awarded
to Paris’ brother after his death. While Odysseus engaged Deiphobus, Menelaus
drew his sword to dispatch his former wife—but in her terror she let her robe
slip from her creamy shoulders, and lust stayed his hand. He dragged her instead
back to his ship—and the same thing happened all the way down to the beach:
any who took up stones to harm her let them fall from slack hands at the sight of
her loveliness. After a hard fight, Deiphobus succumbed to his wounds and bled
to death on the floor of the chamber that he had shared so briefly with the most
desirable woman in the world.
The Greeks gave themselves over to bloodlust. The frustration and fear of ten
long years of warfare awarded them terrible energy. This too was justice: the
Trojans had to pay. Very few survived the slaughter. One was Antenor, his door
marked by Agamemnon for safety, in gratitude for his protection of the
ambassadors ten long years before, and for his known opposition to Paris.
Another was Aeneas, who escaped with his crippled father on his back. He had
taken Laocoön’s suspicions to heart and fled early to the hollows of Mount Ida,
from where he looked down on the burning city and dimly heard the screams of
the dying.
Neoptolemus snatched Hector’s son Astyanax from his screaming mother’s arms
and hurled the innocent baby to his death from a high tower: Andromache was
his prize, and he wanted no whelp of Hector’s in his household. The women
were spared, but not out of mercy: they were hauled off to captivity and slavery
and unwelcome concubinage. Cassandra sought refuge at the altar of Athena,

and unwelcome concubinage. Cassandra sought refuge at the altar of Athena,
and was raped in the very sanctuary by Ajax of Locri, a crime for which the
Locrians are still paying. Then she became the prize of Agamemnon.

Ajax of Locri angered Athena when he raped Cassandra in the goddess’s sacred
precinct.[77]
The most terrible fate awaited Polyxena, the fairest of the daughters of Hecuba
and Priam. After the sack of the city, she was not assigned as booty to any Greek
chieftain, for the ghost of Achilles appeared to the senior Greek officers in a
dream, demanding that she be sacrificed to him, as the price of their departure,
just as Iphigeneia’s death had released them from Greek shores ten years earlier.
Ruthless Neoptolemus eagerly slaughtered the innocent maiden on his father’s
tomb.

Aethra, the mother of Theseus who had been forced to serve Helen, was found
safe and returned to the bosom of her family after so many years.
Hecuba joined the entourage of Odysseus, but she and some of the other women
escaped at the first stop of the Greeks’ journey home, in Thrace. She had sent
her youngest son Polydorus to King Polymestor there for safety during the war,
so that Priam’s line should not altogether die out in case of disaster; but on
hearing of the sack of Troy Polymestor murdered the young man, and now
Hecuba found his corpse washed up on the shore. Feigning ignorance, and
knowing the Thracian king’s greed, Hecuba enticed him and his children into an
ambush with a tale of Trojan gold.
She and her friends slaughtered his children before his eyes, and then blinded
him with their brooches. For this she was turned into a dog—but the former
queen found this preferable to servitude, and thus she was saved from the
hazards of Odysseus’ tortuous journey home.

Chapter Ten
ODYSSEUS’ RETURN
Trouble on Ithaca
Wily Odysseus, king of Ithaca, was the most resourceful of the warriors who
assaulted the walls of Troy. His was the clever trick that opened the wide gates
of the city in the tenth year of the conflict. The story of his return voyage is one
of woe and disaster at every turn, with Death his constant companion. But for the
protection of the gray-eyed goddess Athena, Odysseus would have fed the fishes
many times over.
In assembly with the other immortals who dwell on high Olympus, Athena made
her case before almighty Zeus for the son of Laertes. She argued that now, after
twenty years away from home, he should be allowed to return to the arms of his
devoted wife Penelope. In the absence of Poseidon, who nursed a grievance
against Odysseus, the assembled gods decided in favor of Athena’s suit. Swift
Hermes was dispatched to Ogygia, isle of golden-haired Calypso, divine
daughter of Atlas. On behalf of the cloud-gatherer, Hermes commanded her to
release Odysseus from the island where she had held him for seven long years.
In fear of the almighty father of gods and men, the nymph Calypso reluctantly
obeyed. “You Olympians!” she complained. “You can’t stand it when any other
immortal takes a mortal lover.”

Divine Calypso thought she gave Odysseus all he could want; yet still he pined
for home.[78]
Odysseus was sitting slumped on the shore, looking out over the restless sea with
tears streaming down his cheeks as he prayed unceasingly to be allowed to
return home. His wife Penelope was nothing compared to Calypso—a mere
mortal beside a nymph endowed with eternal youth and beauty—and yet he was
compelled by his love and his duty to return to her. Calypso approached and sat
down beside him in the sand, the long plaits of her golden hair brushing her
shoulders. Speaking gently, she told him to lay aside his cares, for she would
help him leave at last. “Come,” she said, “build a raft, and I will see that it is
well stocked with provisions.”
At first Odysseus suspected another trick, but she reassured him. The raft he
built was frail enough, but he trusted in his skill and in the favor of the gods to
see him safely home to distant Ithaca. After one last night of divine passion, he
set sail. For seventeen days he traveled over friendly seas, and his spirits rose.
But then the lone sailor caught the attention of Poseidon, who had been away
receiving the worship of the Ethiopians. The earth-shaker was annoyed by the
sight of this hated mortal boldly pitting himself against his watery realm. With a
growl he lowered his trident and stirred up the seas around Odysseus, tossing
him to and fro on rising waves until the raft was in danger of breaking up.

But the nymph Leucothea, who had once been Ino, the daughter of Cadmus, saw
Odysseus’ distress and came to him, alighting on his storm-tossed wreck. She
warned him to strip his clothes off and abandon the raft. It was better, said the
White Goddess, to strike out for the shore of Scheria, island of the seafaring
Phaeacians. She loaned him a magic scarf, which she said would protect him
from injury or death. Odysseus hung on to the failing raft as long as he could,
but finally wound the scarf about his waist and dived into the raging sea, trusting
in Leucothea’s words. Poseidon laughed, sure that he had seen the last of the
puny man.
After two days and nights, clinging to a timber from the raft, Odysseus reached
the safety of dry land by a river delta. Naked, exhausted, and uncertain where he
was, he found a copse of trees near the water’s edge. He made a bed of leaves
beneath the trees and covered himself with more leaves for warmth in his
nakedness. At once he fell into a deep sleep.
Meanwhile, back on Ithaca, trouble was brewing in the house of noble Odysseus.
For some time the palace had been occupied by a gang of local noblemen who
daily saw fit to demand that they be fed the good things provided by Odysseus’
royal estates. Droves of livestock were slaughtered and sweet wine drunk by the
cask, all at the expense of the absent king, whom they believed dead. The aim of
each young man was to take for his bride Penelope, Odysseus’ queen. To keep
the suitors at bay, the lady made excuses and tried to trick the men so that she
could delay making a choice.
For three years she had kept them waiting with a single ploy. She claimed it was
necessary before she left the home of her first husband to weave for her aged
father-in-law Laertes an elaborate shroud, so when he should pass none could
say he had not been given the honor due to a well-loved patriarch. Daily she and
her women sat at the loom, weaving the marvelous cloth, and every night in the
upper chamber they unraveled by lamp-light all the fine work of the day. But a
disloyal maid revealed the trick to the suitors, and once again Penelope was
pressured to make a choice.
Witness to all of this was Telemachus, the noble son of Odysseus. Penelope had
only just been delivered of the boy when his father was pressed into joining the
expedition to sack Troy. Nearly two decades had passed and Telemachus was
mature enough to resent this violation of his inheritance, but he lacked as yet the
wisdom and strength to redress it. But Athena, the aegis-bearing daughter of
Zeus, was looking after Odysseus’ son, as well as Odysseus himself.

Zeus, was looking after Odysseus’ son, as well as Odysseus himself.
Athena appeared before Telemachus in the guise of a family friend, a trader from
abroad, who advised the young prince to call an assembly of the men of Ithaca,
to solicit their support for his efforts to oust the suitors from his home. He also
urged the prince to journey to the Peloponnese, to seek out wise Nestor of Pylos,
and Menelaus, king of Sparta. They might provide news of his long-lost father.
Telemachus agreed, and called the men of the region together to discuss the
violation of his father’s house. For the first time in his life, the young man took
the speaker’s staff in his hand and addressed the assembly of Ithaca. He
explained the grievance he held against the suitors, but Antinous, a leader among
those suing for the hand of Penelope, responded with spiteful words. He called
on Telemachus to expel his scheming mother and send her back to her father’s
house, where she could be properly courted and dowered. “It’s time for her to
choose,” Antinous insisted. “No more deception: she has kept us at bay for three
years by pretending that she would soon finish her embroidery. Now she must
admit that Odysseus is dead: she is husbandless, and must choose one of us!”
In anger Telemachus replied that he would not for a moment consider throwing
his mother out of the house, to earn her curses and the displeasure of the
immortal gods. And he promised to destroy the suitors if they persisted, calling
on Zeus, father of gods and men, to witness his oath. As the words passed his
lips, Zeus sent two eagles from the distant mountain. They hovered over the
assembly and then attacked each other, clawing with their razor-like talons,
before swooping off to the east.
A senior member of the assembly read the omen: Odysseus would soon return
and there would be a reckoning against the wastrels who spent their days
stuffing themselves on the fruits of their absent king’s estates, and courting his
lady. Antinous and the other suitors laughed in scorn.
Still in her disguise, Athena followed Telemachus down to the port. She
encouraged the young man, spurring him to action so that the crew could get
under way swiftly, without attracting unwanted attention. And so, without telling
his long-suffering mother Penelope, Telemachus headed out to sea, to find what
word he could about the fate of his long-lost father. And the gray-eyed goddess
accompanied the son of her favorite, to protect and support him on his journey.

Telemachus’ Journey

Telemachus’ first stop was Pylos, the kingdom ruled by Nestor, who had arrived
home from Troy safe and sound. The wise old king maintained his regal bearing,
despite the burden of his years and the many losses he had endured in his long
lifetime. He was tall, with flowing white hair and silken beard, and his dark eyes
flashed with sagacious mirth. He welcomed Telemachus, who accompanied
Nestor to his palace and listened with rapt attention as the old man told him of
his return from Troy.
“There’s little I can say about Odysseus” voyage, since he and I parted company
almost immediately after leaving the shores of Troy. After many days of sailing
we reached the rolling Argive lands, where Diomedes steered his vessels to
shore, and made his way safely home. However, I have heard that his days of
sorrow did not end there. Discovering his wife’s infidelity, forced upon her by
Aphrodite in retaliation for the wound he gave her at Troy, he left Argos and
wandered far from his homeland. In foreign lands, he aided a king against his
enemies, but was repaid with treachery and death. It is said that in their great
mourning his men caught the attention of the gods on Olympus, who
transformed them into herons, and still they keep watch over his tomb.
“I sailed on for Pylos. And although I made it back in one piece, it was a bittersweet return for me. My own dear son, brave Antilochus, had fallen before
windy Troy, as had so many others. We lost Ajax of Salamis, the most able of
the Greeks after Achilles, who fell on his own sword out of shame and never saw
home again. Patroclus lost his life to mighty Hector before the walls of Troy as
he led the Myrmidons in defense of the Greek ships. And Achilles’ life-thread
was cut there too, as he knew it was destined to be. Many of the Greek host met
death in those long years of war. But their fame lives on, for in the wide halls
bards sing of their deeds, and that is the only immortality attainable by man.”
After finishing his tale, Nestor offered Telemachus the use of a fine chariot and
team to carry him swiftly overland to Sparta, where Menelaus ruled with Helen
at his side. To accompany Telemachus on his journey Nestor chose his own son
Peisistratus, and together the two young men set off with the rising sun in their
eyes.

Telemachus left Nestor’s palace and journeyed on to Menelaus at Sparta.[79]
The companions stopped for nothing. Even the rugged and gorge-riven Taygetus
mountains didn’t slow their pace, and two days later they reached the rich lands
of Sparta in the Eurotas valley. The palace of the red-haired king was filled with
the sights and sounds of revelry, for it was a time for weddings. Hermione, the
lovely daughter of Menelaus and white-armed Helen, was being prepared for her
journey to far Phthia. She was betrothed to the godlike son of Achilles,
Neoptolemus, king of the Myrmidons. The gallant Megapenthes, Menelaus’ son
by one of his concubines, was also to be married in the palace; and so the halls
echoed with the sounds of music and good cheer.
The noble travelers were made welcome. Peisistratus introduced Telemachus to
Menelaus, and the Spartan king was overjoyed to see him, for he glimpsed a
young Odysseus in his guest’s face. Just then Helen descended from her upper
chamber to join them at the banquet, and her beauty dazzled all present into
momentary silence. The evening passed, and the young guests were regaled with
tales of the exploits of the Greeks at Troy, and especially of wily Odysseus, until
dawn approached and the eastern sky was tinged with a fresh rosy glow. For
earlier Helen had slipped a drug into the wine that had the property of banishing
care and grief, for a while.

care and grief, for a while.
Later in the day, after all had taken their rest, Telemachus rejoined Menelaus in
the great hall and, giving him a full account of his troubles at home, pleaded for
news of his father. In reply Menelaus recounted for Telemachus the tale of his
own return. “My brother Agamemnon and I,” he said, “parted ways on the sandy
shore of Troy. I sailed my ships down the rich Phoenician coast, where we
stayed long in the luxurious courts of those merchant kings. For seven years we
tarried, Helen and I, but at last I felt compelled to see once more the peaks and
plains of home.
“High winds swept our ships over the seas, until we made land in far-off Egypt.
But when we sought to depart from there, the gods forbade us a swift voyage
home. I had offended them by failing to honor them first, as is their due. Inviting
the wrath of the gods will surely bring a man nothing but a grievous end. Take,
for example, Locrian Ajax, that intrepid warrior, who, I’m told, met his fate in
the surging sea. Athena punished him for his violation of ill-fated Cassandra in
her own holy sanctuary. Zeus loaned the dread goddess his thunderbolt to hurl at
the fleet, and her aim was unerring. Ajax fell overboard, but he clung to some
rocks, all the while jeering at the gods: ‘You can’t kill me!’ Poseidon had wished
to spare him, in spite of Athena’s ire. But even he became annoyed by the
reckless hero’s raving. With a single stroke of his trident, he split the rock, and
the brave son of Oileus was dragged down to the depths, his lungs filling with
brine. Only fools mock the gods.
“But I was not stranded long in Egypt, thanks to Proteus, the Old Man of the
Sea, and his wise daughter Eidothea. On Pharos Island I learned from them of
my transgression and the duty required of me before I could return home. In
reparation, we made rich sacrifices to all the gods and prayed for aid along the
way, so that Helen and I might return with all the fabulous wealth gained from
our travels in foreign lands. And at last we made a happy homecoming, unlike
my royal brother, proud Agamemnon, who was destined to return only to
schemes and murder.
“Now to answer your question,” continued the Spartan king. “Proteus also
shared with me some news of your father, long-suffering Odysseus. He said he
had glimpsed him pining on the shores of Ogygia, Calypso’s isle. She held him
there as her captive, a slave to her own purposes. Without ship or crew he had no
chance of sailing for home.”

The news at once depressed and cheered Telemachus. His father was probably
still alive, but there was no telling when or if he would get home. It was
therefore up to him, Telemachus, to take care of the troubles at home. He refused
Menelaus’ invitation to stay longer. Until his home and hearth were free of the
wasteful and arrogant suitors it was best he should not tarry. Menelaus felt proud
for Odysseus, that he should be the father of such a son, and prayed that soon he
might be restored to his family.

Menelaus introduces Telemachus to Helen, and she guesses he is the son of
Odysseus.[80]
Presently Helen joined them, and lavished upon Telemachus rich guest-gifts to
enhance his reputation and household. The shining chariot and team were
prepared, and the princes sprang aboard. With a flick of the whip they set off
back to sandy Pylos. Telemachus told his hosts there that he would sail
immediately for Ithaca. They bade one another fond farewells, and the pilot set a
course for home.

Odysseus on Scheria
While Odysseus slept on the island of Scheria under the trees near the river’s
mouth, his divine ally, Athena, went into the palace of Alcinous, good king of
the seafaring Phaeacians. Disguised as a childhood companion, she appeared
before Nausicaa, the royal princess. Nausicaa was as sensible as she was

before Nausicaa, the royal princess. Nausicaa was as sensible as she was
beautiful, and each of the young noblemen of the island dreamt of having her for
his wife. Athena put the idea into her mind to go to the river’s edge with her
maids and do the laundry. She asked her father to call for a wagon and mules,
and when all was prepared the young ladies trundled off to the washing pools.
Odysseus was roused by the sounds of splashing and gay laughter issuing from
upriver not far from where he had his mulchy bed. He rose and crept forward,
keeping to the trees for cover, and spied the band of girls on the bank of the
river. The maids and their mistress, lovely Nausicaa, had finished the washing
and laid out the garments and fine linens to dry on warm rocks lining the river
bank. While some bathed themselves in the stream, others played a ball game
with the sparkling-eyed princess, and still others laid out on a cloth on the
ground delicacies and sweet wine mixed with clear water.
Pricked by his great need, Odysseus crept forward, all naked as he was, and
knelt at the feet of the princess. Never one to panic, the young woman responded
graciously to his pleas for help, although her girls had taken fright at the sudden
appearance of the filthy stranger in their midst. She had her women take him off
to bathe in the river, and then they dried him and rubbed him down with olive
oil, while she chose a soft tunic and fine cloak from the freshly washed clothes.
Once he was dressed, Athena made him seem taller and more handsome than
ever, and the women were amazed.

“Odysseus crept forward, all naked as he was, and knelt at the feet of the
princess.”[81]
Nausicaa realized she had given aid to no common man. Then the modest
princess advised her noble suppliant to follow her as she made her way back to
town in the wagon. She warned him, for modesty’s sake, to separate from the
company of ladies when they approached the gates. He was to enter alone and
ask for directions to the palace of Alcinous, her father.
Shrouded in mist by Athena, Odysseus found his way to the palace. Once inside,
he strode briskly to the seat of Queen Arete, royal wife of Alcinous. As he knelt
down and clasped her knees in supplication the mist dissipated. The queen was
amazed at the stranger suddenly in their midst. Looking him over, she couldn’t
help noticing that he wore clothing she herself had spun, and she guessed he had
received aid from Nausicaa. She smiled at her husband, who was sitting by her
side, and welcomed Odysseus with kind and honest words.

Without offering his name, nimble-witted Odysseus related the tale of the
shipwreck that left him at the mercy of Calypso, until after seven long years she
released him. He told how he left the island on his raft, only to be shipwrecked
again on the shores of Scheria, where Nausicaa had found him. He shared his
fervent desire to return once again to his homeland, to sit once more before his
own hearth, with his loyal wife at his side. Alcinous and Arete were moved by
his heartfelt words, and agreed without hesitation to aid him in his quest. They
were not so impolite as to ask him for his name, for he was clearly a man of
standing and deserved their discretion and their hospitality.
The following day King Alcinous called a meeting of his counselors. He ordered
a fast ship to be manned and equipped to carry their long-suffering guest back to
his homeland. The assembly agreed with one voice to the plan, and the work was
immediately set in motion. When all was ready, the good king next called the
ship’s crew together with the noblemen of the realm to join him in the palace
where a sacrifice was prepared to honor the gods, as is proper for those who seek
safe passage across the vast expanse of the hostile and restless sea. After the
ritual and the appropriate prayers to Zeus and all the immortals, a feast was
prepared, and the bard, Demodocus, was summoned to sing of heroic deeds of
times gone by.
When Demodocus had finished his lay, the good king called the men to
demonstrate their prowess in games of strength and skill for their noble guest.
Odysseus was invited to join in, but the travel-weary warrior politely refused.
Yet he was goaded on by another young nobleman, Euryalus, who rashly incited
the hero’s anger with his insults and sarcasm. “Yes,” he said, “I never took you
for a noble, worthy to join our games. You look more like a sailor, thinking only
of risk and profit.”
Quick-tongued Odysseus eloquently stunned the offender into silence and,
following words with deeds, grasped an enormous discus and hurled it aloft. It
sang in the air as it hurtled beyond the marks of the others lately thrown by the
competitors. Athena, disguised as a spectator, marked where the stone landed
and declared Odysseus the clear winner.
After the games, Alcinous commanded that the ship be loaded with gifts
appropriate for a royal guest, and called for a celebration in his wide hall as a
proper send-off for crew and passenger. Euryalus approached Odysseus with a
fine sword of bronze as atonement, which was graciously accepted. In good

humor, the banqueters sat down to the delicious feast laid before them. The bard
was again summoned to ply his trade, as only those gifted by the Muses can.
The tale the inspired Demodocus told was that of the final ploy of the Greeks to
enter the bronze gates of Troy. The stratagem was conceived by crafty Odysseus
himself. Within a hollow wooden horse of monumental size crouched the
concealed Greeks, ready for ambush. The bard’s song brought tears of
remembrance to the eyes of the stranger in their midst, and Alcinous called for
silence. He spoke gently to his guest, questioning him at last about his identity,
his parents, and his homeland. And Odysseus launched into his tale of woe.

The Cyclops Polyphemus
“I am Odysseus, son of Laertes, commander of men. Home for me is sea-girt
Ithaca, though I have not set eyes upon her welcome shores for many years. Nor
do I know what fate has befallen my wife and son, who was a mere babe when I
reluctantly set out for Troy. Not even the womanly wiles of golden-haired
Calypso or the sorceress Circe could persuade me to forget home and hearth,
where all good men yearn to be if, by the will of the gods, they are kept apart
from their loved ones.
“Home was uppermost in my mind when with twelve ships I at last set sail from
the shores of Troy. With an eye to further enrichment we sailed first to the land
of the Cicones in Thrace, where our raids netted us many oxen and sheep, and
captive women to warm our beds. For showing him mercy, a priest of Apollo
there, Maron, gave me some of his very finest wine. This vintage would serve
me well in later days. But some of the men lingered over their feasting and
drinking. Soon local reinforcements swarmed down from the hills in retaliation
against us. Before we could take to the fast ships dozens of men were struck
down, and we lost most of our plunder. It was with considerably lowered spirits
that we continued on our way, mourning our lost comrades.
“The helmsman’s skill and fair weather brought us near to home, but at Cape
Maleas the north wind blew up strong and sent us far off course, out into open
seas. After ten days my crew and I arrived at the strange land of the LotusEaters. The magical fruit they eat makes men forget everything, and fills them
with the desire only to eat lotus and more lotus. On first sampling the fruit, our
landing party nearly succumbed to this evil. It took a great deal of effort to hustle
them aboard, and even then they had to be restrained from jumping ship and

swimming ashore.
“Next we reached the land of the Cyclopes, those lawless, one-eyed giants, who
disdain the gods. Each acts as a law unto himself and recognizes no authority but
his own. We beached our ships on an offshore island rich in produce and grazing
lands for sheep and goats. With renewed optimism we slung our weapons over
our shoulders and set out to hunt. In no time a large herd of goats appeared and
we picked off dozens of them. With hindsight I see that we should have sailed on
straight away, without investigating further, but curiosity got the better of me.
“After a night of feasting and healing sleep, we woke just as dawn began to glow
in the east. Little knowing what we were about to encounter, I told the men that I
would take my ship and crew across to the mainland to seek out any inhabitants.
As we glided across toward the mainland, we spied a flock of sheep and goats
near a large cave. Outside the cave we could make out the silhouette of an
enormous being. Still I was not to be put off—I wanted to know what sort of
people these were. With twelve men and a large goatskin of the rich wine given
me by Maron, I set out to see for myself.
“No one was home when we reached the cave. All around us were young sheep
in their pens, separated by age, bleating for their mothers to come from the
pastures. Soon they arrived, udders swinging from side to side with the weight of
the good milk inside. Their master followed, whistling and clicking his tongue at
them in the language they understood, and we caught our first sight of the
hideous features of the Cyclops, with one huge eye filling the space above his
nose. Once the entire flock was inside the cave, he rolled a massive boulder
across the entrance to the cave. We were trapped! Then he took each ewe aside
and milked her, before letting the lambs suck.
“When he caught sight of us inside his cave the creature roared with displeasure.
The men were panicking, but I strode forward and confronted the Cyclops. I said
that we were survivors from a shipwreck, throwing ourselves on his mercy in the
name of Zeus, patron of suppliants. He replied that he cared nothing for men’s
rules of hospitality or even for the gods themselves. He proceeded then to scoop
up two of my men and eat them, washing his gory meal down with buckets of
fresh ewe’s milk. We cowered in horror at the ghastly sight, and were sickened
by the sound of our friends being crunched in his mouth. If we didn’t escape
soon, none of us was going to make it back to the ship.
“Just before dawn, the Cyclops rolled the gigantic stone away from the entrance

“Just before dawn, the Cyclops rolled the gigantic stone away from the entrance
to the cave. He scooped up two more of my men for breakfast, and washed the
vile meal down with milk, before going about his chores. He released the sheep
from their folds and herded them outside, but blocked the mouth of the cave with
the stone as he departed. We were trapped for the day.
“In the Cyclops’ absence, we searched for some means with which to defend
ourselves. Lying in the sheep pen was a long beam as broad as a tree trunk. We
cut a section of this and sharpened one end to a fine point. We thrust that end
into the fire, turning and hardening it in the blazing coals. Soon we had a
weapon and a picked team to hoist the stake and help me thrust it home, into that
single great eye in the forehead of the Cyclops. But we still needed to get past
the massive stone in the entrance.
“In the evening, when the sun began its slow descent, the Cyclops returned. He
rolled away the stone and herded the ewes back inside, milking them and placing
them with their young, as on the night before. He scooped up two more men for
his gruesome supper. I stepped forward quickly with the great flask of wine
before he could gulp the milk. I offered him a bowl filled to the brim with the
sparkling liquid, and he drank deeply. He held out his bowl for more and asked
me my name. ‘I’m Nobody,’ I told him as I refilled his bowl. He gulped it
eagerly and took more again, bowl after bowl until he passed out on his side by
the fire.
“We sprang as one to the stake we had prepared and raised it up. We lunged
forward as if we stood before the gates of a great city with a battering ram,
determined to break open the bronze doors. The point sank through the giant’s
closed eyelid and deep into the orb, sizzling like roasting fat when it runs off the
skin of a spitted piglet onto the glowing coals below. The monster shrieked in
anguish, so loudly that his neighbors, some distance away, called out in concern.
‘What’s the matter?’ they cried, and Polyphemus shouted back that ‘Nobody’
had attacked him, and so they left him alone to his fate.

Odysseus and his men thrust the stake into Polyphemus’ giant eye.[82]
“Our escape was not yet assured, and despite the searing pain of his blinded eye
the monster squatted down at the mouth of the cave, hoping to catch us one at a
time by feel as we tried to sneak past. But I conceived a plan to save us all. I
ordered the men to grab some sheep from the surrounding pens. I lashed three
sheep together for each man, burying the rope deep in their shaggy hair. The
men clung on to the woolly undersides of the middle sheep, and were protected
from the Cyclops” groping hands by the other two. I myself gripped for all I was
worth to the underside of a huge ram. It worked! The suffering Cyclops
suspected nothing as the beasts ambled from the cave, and continued his torrent
of threats against us as if we were still inside.

Odysseus clung to the underside of a great ram to escape Polyphemus’ wrath.[83]
“Once we had cleared the cave, I untied the men from the sheep and we drove
the herd down to the ship. As we headed back to the islet where we had left our
companions, I hurled insults back at the Cyclops, igniting his rage. He tossed a
boulder which landed near the bow, and its wave nearly washed us back to the
point from which we’d set off. But the oarsmen cut the water with a will and we
were soon out of range. I hollered back my true name as we sped away, and
Polyphemus bellowed after us, calling down upon me the wrath of his father
Poseidon. And Poseidon heard his son’s curses, and has tormented me ever
since.
“We rejoined our comrades. After dividing the herd fairly among the men, we
made a sacrifice of the great ram which had carried me safely from Polyphemus’
cave, thanking Father Zeus for our lives and imploring all the gods for safe
passage across the moaning sea. A great feast was prepared there on the shore
near the ships, and we partook of the fine meats and fragrant wine until fatigue
overcame us and we lay down to sleep. As rosy-fingered dawn began to glow

overcame us and we lay down to sleep. As rosy-fingered dawn began to glow
gently in the east we set sail, hoping for the best.”

Aeolus, the Laestrygonians, and Circe
“Over and over again, in our joy at escaping from Polyphemus’ cave, we regaled
one another with tales of the exploit. Next we made land on the floating island
ruled by Aeolus, steward of the winds, whose six sons are married to his six
daughters. On Aeolia there is unceasing feasting and celebration, day and night,
and we were lavishly entertained in the palace for a month. When we left,
Aeolus generously bestowed upon me a leather bag containing the swirling
powers of the storm winds, so that only fair breezes might speed our voyage.
Refreshed and hoping for the best, we set sail with gentle Zephyrus blowing
astern.
“But my men snooped in the cargo hold, eager to see for themselves if I might
be concealing some fabulous gift given me by Aeolus. The fools discovered the
great leather bag. They unwound the silver thong that sealed the sack, releasing
with a great rush all the winds trapped inside. The storm that arose buffeted the
ships back the way we had come. We found ourselves once more on the shores
of Aeolia, but our welcome this time was not so warm. Aeolus blasted us with
cold words, refusing further assistance to men who were so clearly out of favor
with the immortal gods. So once more we set off, this time with heavy hearts.
“For a week we sailed steadily on these strange seas, until we came to the land
of the Laestrygonians, where the coastline forms a secure and well-sheltered
haven for ships. The other vessels in our company sailed straight in, but I
moored my ship outside the harbor mouth, and sent three men on ahead to
discover what kind of people dwelled there.
“It soon became clear that this was not a hospitable place. As soon as my men
encountered the chieftain of the Laestrygonians, the mountainous man made his
hostile intentions plain by snatching up one of them to be put aside for dinner.
For the Laestrygonians were vile and gigantic cannibals. In shock and horror the
remaining two men sped away from the place and sprang back aboard my ship.
But the other ships were trapped in the harbor, and the Laestrygonians pelted
them with boulders that they tossed as easily as a child skips a stone across the
still surface of a lake. In the blink of an eye my crew was rowing with a will
away from that cursed place. But we were the only survivors; all the other ships
were lost. We sailed on, mourning our lost comrades, terrified lest fresh disaster
strike.

strike.
“Next we came to Aeaea, Circe’s isle. After beaching the ship on the shore, we
ate and rested, and then I detailed my best men to investigate the area. The rest
remained with me, to guard the ship and be ready to take to the sea in case of
danger. We didn’t have to wait long before Eurylochus, the leader of the
reconnaissance party, burst from the trees and ran down to the beach.
“Pale and quaking with fear, he answered our anxious questions. The scouts had
come upon a villa in a clearing of the wood. Strangely, there were wild beasts
rendered tame, lions and wolves, wandering about the grounds. They wagged
their tails and approached the men like dogs who greet their master after a long
absence. From within the house they heard a sweet voice singing. They called
out to the occupant and a beautiful woman emerged. It was the witch Circe,
daughter of Helios and sister of Aeëtes, ruler of Colchis. The sorceress
welcomed the new arrivals and offered them hospitality. All but Eurylochus
heeded her friendly summons and entered. But none came out.
“At this fresh disaster I grabbed my sword and made for the clearing Eurylochus
had described. Near the villa a stranger crossed my path. It must have been a
god, perhaps Hermes, for he offered good advice. He told me to beware of the
food and drink that Circe would offer me as her guest. They were tainted by a
potion that was designed to transform men into beasts. He gave me a dose of
moly, a special antidote to the witch’s evil brew. Then clever Hermes, if that’s
who it was, told me how to get the sorceress to release my men from her magic
spell. I took his advice to heart and made my way through the trees to Circe’s
villa. What I saw there shocked me to the point of despair.
“My good comrades were all together. They were penned into a sty, and all had
been transformed into pigs. They rooted and snuffled the ground, or rolled in the
soft mud, grunting and squealing. But clearly they still retained their wits,
because when they caught sight of me they raised a terrific din in their attempts
to warn me off, or to plead for their release. With anger in my heart I strode
forward and called out to the occupant of the house.
“The radiant Circe emerged and bid me welcome. She led me to a chair, and
offered me a golden cup. It contained her potion, of course, but I had taken the
antidote, so with an internal smile I drank it down. She was astonished that it had
no effect upon me. Following Hermes’ advice, I drew my sword and made as if
to strike her, and she cowered in fear and confusion. Seeming humble and
submissive, she invited me to her bed—another trick, for she bound men with

submissive, she invited me to her bed—another trick, for she bound men with
her sexual charms, but Hermes had told me what to do. After making her swear
that she would play no more tricks, I happily accepted her invitation, for it was
only if she was sexually satisfied that she would release my men.

Hermes supplied Odysseus with an antidote to Circe’s magic potion.[84]
“After we had enjoyed the sweet delights of love, she reversed the spell cast
upon my men, and they were restored to themselves. As soon as the men back at
the ships learned the good news, they joined us. We remained for a year on
Circe’s isle as her welcome guests. And the lovely nymph and I found comfort
together, but never did her charms erase from my heart the memory of my own
dear wife Penelope, or my longing to be reunited with her.

“The men too began to yearn once more for their homes, and I appealed to Circe
for aid in our time of need. The sorceress revealed to me what she knew of the
trials that lay ahead for us. I and my men were to journey to the underworld, the
dark realm where the shades of the dead pass eternity. Once there I was to
question Theban Teiresias, who alone of all who dwell in Hades’ halls retains his
wisdom unimpaired. As I lay beside her in the soft bed, the beautiful witch told
me how I was to summon the dead so that the seer would approach and tell me
all I needed to know.
“When shining-haired Dawn arose in the east I called my men together in the
hall of Circe’s villa and announced our departure. There were shouts and
laughter as the men made ready, gathering their gear and preparing to return to
the ship beached on the shore. One of my men was on the roof, sleeping off the
several flagons of wine he had consumed the night before, and he woke
unsteadily to the noise below. Bleary-eyed and off balance, unlucky Elpenor fell
from the roof and broke his neck. My comrades and I knew nothing of it, so we
left him behind when we departed. His body lay there, unburied and unmourned,
with his shade lingering uneasily at the edge of the underworld.”

The Underworld
“Divine Circe called forth a following wind as her parting gift, and we cut a
wake through the foam-topped swell. I gathered the men on deck and announced
our destination. They responded with exclamations of disbelief and fear, their
hopes of heading straight for home dashed in a moment. Were we really sailing
for the ends of the world and the home of the dead? But we remained true to the
course I set and at last arrived on the far western shore of the great Ocean which
encircles the world. The men and livestock disembarked, and I chose a ram and a
black ewe that Circe had added to our stores, elements of the ritual necessary for
calling up the shades of the dead.
“When we reached the place the witch had described, I knelt down and with my
trusty sword carved a shallow trench. Into it I poured the proper libations of
honey, milk, wine, and water. I sprinkled white barley over all, and made prayers
and invocations. I slit the throats of the victims, and the blood flowed into the
narrow trench and sank down into the thirsty earth. Instantly the place was
swarming with the insubstantial spirits of the dead, agitated by the presence of
the blood and greedy to partake of it. But I held them back with my brandished
sword. In the meantime my men went about the business of preparing the sheep
and ram for sacrifice as burned offerings to fearsome Hades and august

and ram for sacrifice as burned offerings to fearsome Hades and august
Persephone, dread rulers of the underworld.

Hades and Persephone rule the dead, yet they also govern the cyclic renewal of
life.[85]
“The first of the dead to approach me was unlucky Elpenor, my own comrade
who had lately fallen from the roof of Circe’s house. I exclaimed in surprise at
the sight of him, and after he had told me his sad tale I promised to return to
Circe’s isle and see to his burial.
“Just then the Theban prophet Teiresias approached. He recognized me, and
when he had drunk the blood he revealed for me a homeward voyage filled with
yet more dangers. Poseidon would dog my trail, intent on revenge for the

blinding of his son, the Cyclops Polyphemus. In forbidding tones he warned me
to control my men, especially when we came to Thrinacia, where the cattle of
the all-seeing sun graze the wide green pastures of that island.
“As if all this weren’t bad enough, the seer went on to tell me that my arrival
home, after so many years of suffering and homesickness, would also be fraught
with trouble. My home had been invaded by a band of insolent young nobles,
eager to consume my wealth and woo my queen. He predicted that I would set
things right in the end and there would be a reckoning for the suitors, but warned
that my wanderings would not be over even then.
“In order finally to appease the wrath of Poseidon, he told me, I was to travel far,
carrying with me an oar, seeking a people who knew not the sea. I would come
to a place where the oar was identified as a winnowing shovel by some
unknowing soul, and there I was charged to erect a shrine to the earth-shaker.
“Only then could I make my way safely home. The one piece of good news he
shared with me was that I would meet my life’s end in great old age, at my own
hearth, surrounded by my loved ones. Then he departed, making his way back
through the crowds of mirthless dead.

Teiresias drank the sacrificial blood while Odysseus fended off the ghosts.[86]
“I saw the shade of my beloved mother Anticlea, and she spoke briefly with me.
I had not known she was dead. Though I wanted desperately to hold her in my
arms, just once more, my hands grasped nothing but the insubstantial air, and her
ghost moved away finally to join the other wandering shades. Other great
women and men approached, and after I let them taste of the blood, they spoke
to me.

to me.
“Of those who addressed me it was Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who came
forward first. He shared with me the tragic story of his homecoming, how his
scheming wife Clytemestra and her lover Aegisthus murdered him in his own
bath, before the oars of his black ships had even begun to dry. And he told me
how they took the life of ill-starred Cassandra, his war-prize, and killed all his
loyal companions too. The once-great king held my eyes and warned me to
approach my home shores secretly, even in disguise, and not reveal myself until
I knew what I was facing. I took his advice to heart. For some time we stood
together, though separated by the shallow trench of dark blood, and we
reminisced over lost comrades-in-arms, many of whose shades milled about
before me, anxious to drink and exchange words with a living man.
“There was Ajax of Salamis, who still begrudged me the arms of Achilles, and
refused to speak to me. The Greek heroes Antilochus and Patroclus drew near,
and then Achilles strode forward and took a sip. Recognizing me, he demanded
to know what tricks I was up to now, making my way to the underworld while
still a living man. Was this not the crowning exploit for any hero? ‘Not so,’ I
replied. ‘For no one is recognized as a greater hero than you. You were admired
as the greatest of the Greeks in your lifetime, and now you have high honor
among the dead.’
“But Achilles replied in sorrow that he would prefer to be a peasant laborer in
the world above than king of the listless dead. Nevertheless, I was able to
console him somewhat with news of his son, Neoptolemus. With words that
cheered the mournful shade I described to Achilles the bravery of his son at
Troy. At the end of the war, with his plundered wealth loaded into his ships he
set sail from the wind-swept shores of Troy, and made for the Thessalian coast.
There, on the advice of Thetis, he burned his ships and continued over land for
home. As far as I know, I told him, he rules now in Phthia, home of the valiant
Myrmidons. Achilles’ shade thanked me for my words and strode proudly off, a
new spring in his step.
“I saw too the ghosts of others, famous or infamous. There was Tityus, who paid
a dear price for lusting after Leto. His vast bulk is lashed to the ground, and
there, with arms outstretched he exposes his belly to the vultures that daily peck
away at his liver. Tantalus too I spied, tempted as he is unceasingly by food and
drink that remain forever out of reach. Cunning Sisyphus of Corinth was there,
laboring at his endless task, a punishment for his transgression against the

laboring at his endless task, a punishment for his transgression against the
immortal gods. For it is a fool who takes the gods in heaven lightly.
“I saw the wise king Minos there, dispensing justice among the dead along with
his brother Rhadamanthys, as they were the first to dispense laws to god-fearing
men. Last of all I spied the wraith of long-laboring Heracles, whose mortal self
was burned away on the pyre at Trachis. His immortal self dwells now on
Olympus, and he has Hebe, daughter of Hera, for wife. He recognized me, and
shook his shaggy head in commiseration at my unease here in the presence of the
dead. He recalled his own encounter in the underworld while still a living man,
when Eurystheus commanded him to go down to Hades’ halls and retrieve
Cerberus.
“I might have waited longer for other heroes of the past to approach, but
suddenly the press of disembodied souls, eager to taste of the bright blood,
disconcerted me and filled me with fear. I turned and made my way quickly back
to the ship and the familiar company of living men.”

Dangers at Sea
Peerless Alcinous and his noble queen were transfixed by Odysseus’ tale, as
were all the banqueters in the spacious hall, hung with fine tapestries. The weary
wanderer pleaded fatigue and declared his intention to go and sleep on his ship
until its departure, but they begged him to refresh himself from the board, take a
draft of sparkling wine, and continue his story. In the meantime, Alcinous
commanded that more gifts be added to those already bestowed upon fartraveled Odysseus, and all the nobles of Scheria sent porters down to the black
ship waiting in the harbor and added their own presents to those of the king and
his lady. After taking some refreshment the unhappy hero again took up the
thread of his tale:
“We set sail in haste, the better to get away from that dreadful place, and a
following wind sent us swiftly back the way we came. We arrived in good time
at Circe’s isle, and after we had rested on the sandy shore, we set about
retrieving the body of poor Elpenor, our lost companion. We buried him
properly and heaped a mound over his remains, with his oar on top to serve as a
grave marker. Circe joined us for the meal that followed the mourning.
“The nymph and I sat apart from the others, and she offered me further advice.
She warned that our route would take us by the lair of the Sirens, terrible
creatures, half bird and half woman, whose captivating song lures men to certain

creatures, half bird and half woman, whose captivating song lures men to certain
death. Circe told me that, when we drew near, I should take some beeswax and
soften it between my fingers. I should use it, she said, to plug the ears of my
men, so that they might row past the Sirens without hearing a note of their
tempting song. The only way I could hear their melodies for myself, if I were
foolish enough, was to have the men lash me tightly to the tall mast of the ship.
No matter how much I cried out to be released, the men would not heed my
demands—they could not, with their ears plugged. I took shining Circe’s words
to heart, and listened closely as she continued.
“Once we had passed the lair of the Sirens, we would have to brave the passage
where the fearsome monsters Scylla and Charybdis made their home. It was
impossible, Circe warned, for us to get by these dread creatures unscathed. And
yet, if we made it through the passage at all, there remained another challenge
for us to face. The island of Thrinacia lies beyond the strait where Scylla and
Charybdis await their victims. This magical isle is the pastureland for the cattle
of all-seeing Helios, which are tended by his daughters. It would be best, the
witch sternly warned, if I and the men sailed past this isle. If even one of his
fine, fat cows were hurt, the wrath of the sun-god would fall on my ship and
crew.
“At dawn my comrades and I put to sea once again. What should I say to prepare
the men for the evils we were to face? I needed their cooperation to get past the
Sirens, so I warned them about this danger, but I held my silence about the strait
beyond, lest they panic. When I judged that we were close to the island of the
dread Sirens, I had every crewman place softened wax in his ears, so that he
would remain as immune to the lethal song as he would to my pleas. Me the men
lashed firmly to the stepped mast of the ship.

Lashed to the ship’s mast, Odysseus endured the lethal beauty of the Sirens’
song.[87]
“As soon as the coastline appeared I began to hear a melody wafting from the
shore. The creatures called to me by name, enticing me to stop for a while and
listen as they sang me tales of the heroic deeds of great men living and dead.
Their voices were … indescribable. Every thought and emotion fled from my
heart and was replaced with the pressing need to join the company of these sweet
singers. They seemed to promise eternal bliss. In my enchantment, I strained
mightily against my bonds, and I demanded to be set free, gesturing urgently to
my deaf crewmen with my brows. But the men only tied me tighter, as I had
ordered. I am the only man who has heard the deadly chorus and lived to tell the
tale. We sailed past, my men freed me, and I steeled myself for the next
encounter, which lay just ahead of us.
“The waters before us churned and there was a terrific roar from the echoes of
waves crashing against the high cliffs that framed the strait. On one side
Charybdis sucked down the waters in a vortex so powerful that at its bottom the
sea-bed was visible. Then with a mighty upward thrust all that had been sucked
down was spewed forth again in an awesome jet. The gaping men ceased rowing
in their terror, but I ordered them to take up their oars and cut the water with a

in their terror, but I ordered them to take up their oars and cut the water with a
fury, so we might get through in one piece. Seeing that Charybdis was
impassable, we hugged the opposite side closely, while I kept a careful watch for
Scylla, who has the bark of a puppy but the bite of a six-headed beast. She shot
out of her cave in a flash, taking us all by surprise. Half a dozen snaky necks
writhed above the ship, and in the blink of an eye the creature had six of my
men. Their pitiful screams will haunt me to the grave.”

The Cattle of the Sun
“We passed through the straits, rowing with all our might to distance ourselves
from the evil, and our hearts were heavy with grief for the loss of our comrades.
Before long we approached the isle where the daughters of Helios tend his
lowing cattle, and although I too felt in need of rest and recuperation, I urged the
men to row on and seek another place for shelter. I shared at last the stern
warnings of Circe and Teiresias, that to destroy even one of the cattle of Helios
would mean disaster for us all. But I was gainsaid by one of my outspoken
comrades, who argued for taking shelter on the island, since the men had had
enough. I extracted a promise from my men to avoid the sacred cattle. We
beached our good ship and set about preparing a meal from the stores we had on
board.
“But a god sought to test my men. A contrary wind rose, and we were trapped on
the island for many weeks. Our supplies ran out. The men took to hunting and
fishing, but their mood became desperate. I went apart to a sacred clearing to
make offerings and supplications to the immortal ones for a change of weather.
Some god must have put me into a deep sleep, because I heard nothing—none of
the noise and commotion as my men weakened and killed some of the cattle. I
woke to the aroma of spitted roast, and my heart sank. I hurried to the shore,
shouting at them to desist from their folly, but of course the damage was done.

Contrary to their oath, Odysseus’ men butchered and roasted the forbidden
cattle of the Sun.[88]
“Before our terrified eyes, the flayed hides of the slaughtered beasts began to
crawl about the campsite, and the spitted meat over the coals bellowed its pain.
These portents made us desperate to leave the island, but for days we remained
stranded there by the unceasing gale, and my comrades continued to gorge on
the forbidden meat. Dejected, I sat away from camp, sure in the knowledge that
they were doomed. When Zeus finally had the winds change, I ordered the men
aboard. We shoved off with a dark cloud hovering over our vessel and my heart.
“Before long ferocious winds began to blow with astonishing force from the
west. In a moment the mast and stays were split like tinder and the beam crashed
down, striking the helmsman a deadly blow. Zeus hurled a thunderbolt, and it
struck us amidships, shattering the hull. The men and their dying screams were
swallowed up by the raging sea. I alone survived, clinging to the upturned keel
and the remainder of the mast.
“All night I floated, back through the straits to confront yet again those twin
terrors Scylla and Charybdis. My only hope of safety lay in perfect timing.
When the swirling vortex began sucking at my makeshift raft, I lunged for the

When the swirling vortex began sucking at my makeshift raft, I lunged for the
cliff-face, and clung for all I was worth to a fig tree jutting precariously out over
the churning water. An eternity passed before the monster belched the mast and
keel back out. I leapt into the swirling current and gripped them tightly again,
keeping my head low as I drifted beneath dread Scylla’s lair. I lay exposed on
the unforgiving sea for nine days until at last I came ashore at Ogygia, immortal
Calypso’s island home. My sad tale concludes here. You know all the rest.”

Odysseus Reaches Ithaca
All the banqueters went their separate ways to sleep, and the next day King
Alcinous was pleased to escort his guest to the harbor, where he oversaw the
stowing of Odysseus’ many guest-gifts. The traveler thanked his hosts with
typical eloquence, and offered a blessing to all the people for their kindness and
generosity. They cast off with the chariot of the sun descending in the west.
Lying on the deck Odysseus fell into a deep sleep, a magical sleep, while the
Phaeacian ship sailed on beneath the sparkling stars. While it was still dark, they
reached Ithaca and beached in a remote cove. Quickly and quietly, the crew
gently brought the exhausted warrior from the ship and set him down on the sand
near a sacred cave. Next they unloaded all the gifts he had received from the
noble folk of Scheria, and set them nearby. All the while Odysseus slept as one
who was dead.
Meanwhile, Poseidon learned of Odysseus’ safe arrival home. The earth-shaker
was annoyed to learn that the Phaeacians had assisted the king’s return. He
complained to Zeus, threatening to raise an impassable mountain chain around
their island kingdom. But the cloud-gatherer persuaded his furious brother to
make an example only of the ship that had carried Odysseus home, rather than
take more drastic measures. When the ship hove into view, the Phaeacians
onshore rejoiced to see their countrymen returning. But just at that moment
Poseidon struck the ship with the flat of his mighty hand, and instantly it turned
to stone. There it sits today, a reminder of the consequences of crossing the gods,
who are quick to anger.
Odysseus slept on, unaware that he was home at last on Ithaca. Athena came
upon her favorite as he slept and hid him in a fine mist. He woke at last, looking
about but seeing nothing that recalled home. The long-absent king groaned in
dismay and set about checking his treasure, suddenly suspicious that his
Phaeacian hosts had tricked him by abandoning him on a strange shore and
taking back their fine gifts. He had suffered so much already that nothing would

taking back their fine gifts. He had suffered so much already that nothing would
surprise him.
There he stood, muttering to himself, surrounded by golden goblets and threelegged bronze cauldrons. But gray-eyed Athena stepped forward in disguise as a
young shepherd, and told him where he was. Valiant Odysseus rejoiced to hear
he was finally on home soil, though he carefully refrained from revealing
himself to the shepherd. He said instead that he was a Cretan noble, in exile for
killing the son of Idomeneus. Athena indulged him as he spun his tale, taking
pleasure in her incorrigible favorite. She touched his cheek, and as she did so her
shepherd’s guise fell away, and she stood before him in her divine loveliness.
After reassuring the long-suffering Odysseus that he was indeed home, the wise
goddess prepared him for his next ordeals. She warned of the danger within the
palace, and advised him to make his way to his swineherd, Eumaeus, who had
remained loyal, and shelter there among the fatted pigs until he came up with a
plan for revenge. Together they concealed the fine gifts in the sacred cave. Then
the goddess disguised Odysseus as a wrinkled old beggar, and dressed him
appropriately in filthy rags.
Athena sent him on his way to the farmstead beyond the town, while she swiftly
made to intercept Telemachus, who was at that moment close to home on his
way back from the sandy shores of Pylos. Athena warned him that a band of the
wicked suitors was lying in ambush for him at the main port, so he asked to be
let off elsewhere, explaining that he wished to inspect his estates and make his
way back to town on foot. The ship sailed on without him around to the port of
Ithaca. Alone, he began walking toward the humble hut of Eumaeus the
swineherd.

At the Swineherd’s Hut
Much-traveled Odysseus made his way to the farmstead, where he was
welcomed and fed by his old servant. Over their humble meal, Eumaeus related
to the stranger the story of how he came to be in the service of the royal house of
Ithaca. His family was noble, from a far-away place called Syria. One day, when
Eumaeus was a mere boy, a disloyal maidservant made off with him on a pirate
ship. The men aboard sold him to Laertes, who raised him with a gentle hand,
almost as a member of his own family. He was taught to care for the pigs and
given his own small place.
Eumaeus smiled at the memory, but then his face darkened. His present master,

Eumaeus smiled at the memory, but then his face darkened. His present master,
the great Odysseus, had gone off twenty years before to fight at windy Troy, and
had never returned. How the estates had suffered as a result! The presumptuous
suitors, who returned daily to feast, were consuming all the best things for
themselves. “I can hardly bring myself to go into town these days,” he said. “I
can’t bear to see the destruction of my master’s wealth by those arrogant
bastards.”
In his beggar’s disguise, Odysseus spun a false tale to Eumaeus of his own
background. He claimed again to be a noble Cretan, but this time one who had
served in the company of Idomeneus when he was called by the Greeks to fight
at Troy. Years of adventure on the seas had finally seen him shipwrecked near
the shores of Thesprotia. He was saved by the son of the king, who offered him
hospitality. It was in the grand halls of the king’s palace in Thesprotia, he said,
that he learned of valiant Odysseus’ fate. Ithaca’s king had gone to the sacred
grove at Dodona to learn the will of Zeus, and would soon be safely back in his
own country.
But, the beggar went on, he himself had suffered more misery when the crew of
the Thesprotian ship he joined robbed him and tied him up for the slave market.
Nevertheless, when the ship reached Ithaca, he had made his escape, and now he
sat before Eumaeus, his generous host.
The good swineherd cocked his eye at the beggar’s story, discarding with a
shake of his head the bit about the king’s imminent return. If he had a bushel of
grain for every time he’d heard such a rumor, he’d be a wealthy man. He rose
and prepared a simple meal, and after they had eaten and drunk they lay down
for the night in the shelter of the hut.
Early the next day, Odysseus, still in his beggar’s disguise, heard the sounds of
the dogs fawning over someone, thumping their tails on the ground and
whimpering in recognition. In a moment, the handsome face of Telemachus
appeared in the doorway. With a cry of delight the loyal swineherd dropped
everything and folded the young man in his embrace, tears stinging his eyes, and
ushered him into the humble dwelling.
After the men had eaten and drunk their fill the young prince questioned
Eumaeus about the stranger in their midst. The kindly swineherd reported what
the old beggar had told him the night before. Odysseus, who had stepped
outside, overheard this exchange, and saw an opportunity to get things moving in

outside, overheard this exchange, and saw an opportunity to get things moving in
the direction he wanted. He went back inside and declared his indignation that
the suitors should get away with their scandalous behavior.
“You’re right, of course, stranger,” said Telemachus. “But what can I do? I am
one man, with no available allies, and they are many. Once they’ve consumed all
my father’s wealth, they’ll turn on me. I have no hopes for a long life.” He
turned to Eumaeus and told him to go down to the town and announce his return
to patient Penelope, but to no one else. The swineherd nodded and set off briskly
on his errand.
Wise Athena appeared just then in the open doorway of the hut and cocked her
brow at Odysseus, who followed her outside. It was time, she said, for him to
reveal himself to his son. As she did so the beggar’s rags were miraculously
replaced with splendid clothes and the king stood before her looking more regal
than ever. Odysseus stepped back into the hut and stood before his son.
Telemachus cried out in amazement, for he had not seen the goddess work her
magic on the beggar. He piously shielded his eyes, believing himself in the
presence of a god. With gentle words Odysseus assuaged his son’s fear. “Have
no fear,” he said. “I am no god. I am, in fact, your father.”
At first, Telemachus refused to believe it, thinking the gods were tricking him,
but Odysseus explained how Athena had effected his transformation. They
locked into a strong embrace, each shedding tears of joy and pain on the
shoulders of the other.
When father and son could speak again, their talk turned to revenge. Odysseus
swore Telemachus to secrecy, and together they hatched a plan to take the
transgressors unawares. Telemachus would allow a “wretched beggar” some
small corner within the palace halls, as is proper for those who honor the laws of
hospitality. Just as the Trojans were taken unawares when the Greeks burst forth
from the Wooden Horse, so the suitors would be ambushed by the wiles of
Laertes’ son.
Meanwhile, the suitors had received word that their attempt to kill Telemachus
had failed. Somehow the young man had slipped through their fingers. Seething
with frustration, the impious band gathered to discuss a new plot. But they were
overheard, and news reached the queen in the women’s quarters of the palace
just as the loyal swineherd Eumaeus arrived to announce Telemachus’ safe
arrival.

arrival.
Queen Penelope decided to take action. She summoned her maids. Together they
descended to the hall where the suitors lazed about. Penelope confronted them
with stinging words, especially the ringleaders, and accused them of plotting to
murder her son. They chided her for her baseless accusations, and argued that
whatever men plan, for good or ill, the gods will have their own way. If they had
only known how truly they spoke! The indignant queen withdrew in disgust,
back to her chambers, where she gave way to bitter tears.
Eumaeus arrived back at the hut before the sun sank in the west. The king was
disguised again, back in his beggar’s rags, so that the swineherd still had no idea
who he was. The three shared a meal together and lay down for sleep. Prince
Telemachus was up with the first glow of dawn and ready to make his way to the
palace. He told Eumaeus to escort the stranger to the town later in the day, where
he could beg from people as he saw fit.

In the Palace
The prince arrived at the palace to a heartfelt welcome from the household. His
dear mother flew to his side, tears of joy streaking her cheeks. She gently
upbraided him for leaving her in the dark about his journey, but rejoiced at his
safe return. She ordered delicacies and sweet wine be served. Telemachus took a
polished chair and sat down beside Penelope while she questioned him about his
journey.
Later in the morning, the swineherd Eumaeus and Odysseus set out for town.
The king, still in his pathetic rags, carried a worn staff loaned to him by his
faithful servant, who still had no idea who this beggar really was. They came to
the public fountain just outside the city, where another of Odysseus’ herdsmen,
Melanthius, passed them on his way to the palace with fatted livestock for the
suitors’ midday feast. He heaped abuse upon their heads, and even landed a kick
on the beggar’s backside. Proud Odysseus remained passive, but took note of his
servant’s disloyalty.
The companions walked on toward town. As they passed the dung heaps piled
on either side of the road near the gates, Odysseus heard a whimper. In the
ordure lay an old hunting dog, covered in flies. The decrepit hound raised his
head in recognition of their voices, and Odysseus saw that the dog was his
favorite, Argus, who had shown such promise twenty long years before. At the
sight and scent of his master, valiant Argus struggled to lift himself out of the
filth in which he lay. But the effort overwhelmed him and he fell back, breathing

filth in which he lay. But the effort overwhelmed him and he fell back, breathing
his last. The hound’s loyalty touched the king deeply, and he weighed it in his
heart against Melanthius’ treachery, and the insolence of his enemies.
Within the palace, preparations for the banquet had begun. The smell of roasting
meat hung in the air. A lyre twanged as it was tuned. Eumaeus arrived at the
door of the palace with his charge, and went inside to find Telemachus.
Meanwhile the king-as-vagrant seated himself on the threshold of his own
palace, where he was given a morsel of meat and a heel of bread. Later he went
around the long table in the wide hall and begged from each of the suitors, sizing
them up as he passed.
Disloyal Melanthius sat among the suitors and continued his verbal abuse. The
mood in the hall became tense. Antinous, one of the ringleaders, went so far as
to lob a footstool at the beggar, which struck him in the shoulder. But patient
Odysseus did nothing and kept his humble place near the threshold. He knew his
enemies’ fate was sealed, and that he himself was the agent of its fulfillment.
The feast was nearly over when the bard took up his lyre and the banqueters
turned to drinking and dancing. Another vagrant arrived at the door of the
palace. It was despicable Arnaeus. He made a career of begging, and resented
any weary travelers taking his place in the town. He accosted Odysseus, in his
disguise near the threshold. Odysseus’ long-held anger needed venting, and it
was the misfortune of Arnaeus that he arrived on the scene when he did.
The two beggars bandied insults, circling like wrestlers in a bout. The suitors
were amused to see the tramps going at it. They even offered a prize to the victor
of the comical contest. Cowardly Arnaeus tried to escape, but the suitors tossed
him back into the ring. The fool soon exposed himself. Odysseus punched him
hard under the ear and sent him sprawling. Justice was at hand in the palace of
Odysseus.

Arnaeus’s ill-treatment of the disguised Odysseus earned him nothing but blood
and pain.[89]
The news of the fracas spread through the palace and at last reached the good
queen. Penelope called Eumaeus to her chamber to question him about the new
beggar in their midst. She asked to see the stranger later in the evening, when
they could converse in peace. Then Penelope went down to the hall, and the
gray-eyed goddess enhanced her already prodigious beauty. With her maids she
descended to the hall. The queen covered her face with a sheer veil as she
entered the room, but her loveliness was as impossible to ignore as the sunrise.
First she gently chided her beloved Telemachus for allowing such rough
behavior within the palace halls. But the ringleaders, Eurymachus and Antinous,
spoke boldly to the queen, extolling her beauty. She responded curtly that her
beauty had long since dimmed from years of longing for her beloved husband.
But now, she declared, the time of waiting was finished. Every man who sought
her hand was to cease wasting the wealth of Odysseus and bring her from his
own house proper bride-gifts. Eagerly the suitors sent squires for the best their
estates could offer, but they made it clear that, until she had made her choice,
they would remain feasting in the palace, eating and drinking all they wanted.
Penelope retired in dismay to her chamber.

Penelope Meets the Beggar

Braziers were lit in the palace, for day was quickly fading. Odysseus remained in
the hall to suffer the abuses heaped upon him by the disreputable suitors. Thus
his ire was stoked even as he tended the fires of his own palace hall. Finally,
when they had had enough of debauchery, each of the suitors left for his own
home to sleep it off.
Telemachus and his father were alone at last, and finalized their plans for
vengeance. Odysseus told his son to collect all the weapons and armor and lock
them safely away from the suitors. Meanwhile, still disguised, Odysseus
returned to the hall to face his interview with the queen, his own beloved
Penelope.
The long-suffering queen entered the hall preceded by her maids, and a chair
was brought up for the vagrant to sit by her side. They talked long into the night.
Though he was reluctant to tell more lies to his wife, she pressed him to explain
himself, and in response he began to spin yet another yarn. He said that he was a
son of the royal Cretan house. When Idomeneus departed for Troy, he had
stayed behind as regent, and in that time he had met Odysseus, who with his
ships and men had been blown off course by a gale and made land at Crete. He
claimed to have entertained her husband for many days before and Odysseus
sailed on to Troy.
Lonely Penelope guilelessly opened her heart to the strange beggar with the
noble demeanor. In her grief and longing she begged him to describe for her
what Odysseus’ bearing was like, what clothes he wore, all those years ago when
he had been driven onto Cretan shores. Proud Odysseus thought to brighten her
memory of him by painting himself in the most flattering light. She gasped at his
description of a beautiful purple cloak attached at the shoulder by a large brooch
wrought of gold. In tears, she recounted how she had herself packed these things
among Odysseus’ belongings before he left so many years ago.
The stranger then made a prediction for the weeping queen: that her resourceful
husband was, at that very moment, on his way back to home and family, with
great wealth gained abroad. At the stranger’s earnest words, grieving Penelope
smiled through her shining tears, and prayed that his words might come to pass.
Then she called Eurycleia to come and wash the feet of their humble guest, as he
would allow none of the younger women to touch him and prepare him for bed.
The old nursemaid Eurycleia knelt at the beggar’s feet and began bathing them

in the copper basin of warm water. She was already surprised by how much the
stranger reminded her of her long-lost master—and then on his left knee she
spied a scar that the young Odysseus had earned hunting boar on Mount
Parnassus years earlier. She glanced up at the old beggar, pain and joy passing
through her heart and over her features. “But … you … you are Odysseus!,” she
murmured, and tears started in her kind old eyes. But Odysseus urged her to
silence until he gave the signal, and she agreed to keep the secret.
Athena had distracted Penelope from hearing their exchange, but in a moment
the queen returned to her humble guest. She related to him a dream about an
eagle destroying a flock of gaggling geese. He interpreted the dream for her. It
was obvious, he said. The gods had revealed to her that Odysseus’ return was
imminent, as was the destruction of the suitors by his hand.
She prayed again that the beggar’s words might come true. But in the morning,
she told him, she would summon the suitors for a test founded upon the
prodigious skills of Odysseus himself. Twelve ax-heads were to be lined up in a
row on a table, and the archer who shot an arrow through all twelve—through
the holes where the handles would go—would win her hand in marriage. Only
Odysseus had been able to perform the feat in the past. What’s more, they were
to use the king’s bow, left behind when he sailed from Ithaca’s shores.
When bright Dawn appeared on her golden throne, quick-witted Odysseus was
up and preparing for the fateful day that lay ahead. It was a festival day sacred to
Apollo the far-shooter, and the palace bustled with activity. Servants scrubbed
and polished floors and tables, or ground grain for bread. The herdsmen came
driving beasts before them—Eumaeus with choice pigs, Melanthius with fine
goats, and finally Philoetius, the master cowherd, with the pick of the royal
cattle. This good man took notice of the beggar in his rags standing by the gate.
He strode over with his hand outstretched in greeting, despite the vitriolic words
that Melanthius spat in their direction. Wily Odysseus took note that the
cowherd could be valuable in a fight.
Noble Telemachus returned from the assembly and sacrifices in honor of Apollo.
All the suitors had arrived earlier, seeing no reason to stay for the full rite as
pious men do. They hurried back to Odysseus’ palace to renew their debauchery.
Just as the prince passed the threshold a cow’s hoof, hurled by one of the
despicable suitors, whizzed past him. It struck the wall near the poor beggar,
who merely turned his head slightly to avoid the missile. A look full of the
promise of doom for the suitors passed between father and son.

promise of doom for the suitors passed between father and son.

Vengeance
The goddess with the flashing eyes, Athena, inspired courage in clever Penelope,
who called her maids to attend her. Together they went to the storeroom where
her husband’s most precious belongings were stowed under lock and key. She
drew forth his awesome bow in its case and the quiver of swift arrows. The
maids picked up the bronze ax-heads, and followed their mistress back through
the dark corridor to the light-filled hall.
The lady Penelope veiled her lovely cheeks and confronted the men. They told
her that they had brought their bride-gifts, and reminded her, insolently, that
today she was to choose one of them to be her lord. In return, she challenged
them to emulate the feat of mighty Odysseus—to string the great bow and shoot
an arrow through the twelve gleaming ax-heads. The winner would gain her as
his wife.
At the sight of the king’s wonderful bow and the gleaming axes the herdsmen
Eumaeus and Philoetius grieved for their long-lost king. But Telemachus
gestured at the suitors to step forward, and he himself was the first to attempt to
string the bow. Three times he tried and failed. On the last attempt the bow was
nearly strung, but Odysseus, still in his place by the entrance, caught his son’s
eye and signaled him to desist. With a dramatic groan the prince gave up and set
down the bow. One by one the men took their turn, and each suffered sarcastic
abuse from the others as he failed. Disgusted by the sight of such unsuitable men
handling their king’s favorite bow, Eumaeus and Philoetius left the hall. Quickwitted Odysseus dashed after them and, to their joy and amazement, revealed
himself to them. Like Eurycleia, they recognized him by the scar on his knee. He
quickly enlisted them in his plan for revenge.
Finally the bow came around to Eurymachus, one of the ringleaders of the gang.
Try as he might, he could not string it. Pouting, he thrust the bow aside with a
scowl. The revelers rationalized that on the festival day of Apollo, it was
improper to string a bow anyway. Tomorrow would be better, they decided, after
they had sacrificed a goat and burned the fat and thigh bones as an offering to
the archer god. With that the suitors returned to their cups.
Then the beggar offered to entertain them by trying himself to string the
magnificent bow. The rude suitors mocked, threatened, and heaped insults upon

him. But queenly Penelope stepped forward and overrode the men, offering the
vagrant new clothes and passage abroad if he should manage the feat.
Telemachus concurred, and then suggested to his dear mother that she go about
her household duties in the women’s quarters. He knew that things would soon
get ugly. Meanwhile Eumaeus went to warn Eurycleia to lock the maidservants’
rooms, which she did at once.
Odysseus took up his bow and examined it, looking for signs of woodworm or
aging over the past twenty years. The suitors cried out in mockery: “Ha! So now
this beggar is an expert bowman, is he?” But to their amazement and shame, the
beggar bent the bow and strung it, with no sign of effort. He plucked the taut
string, and it responded with a twang. His lip curled with satisfaction at the
balance of the weapon in his hand. The suitors sat stupefied. The beggar picked
up the arrow at his feet, leveled the shaft, and notched it. He pulled back, took
aim, and let fly. The arrow passed cleanly through all twelve of the ax-heads. A
thunderclap burst overhead, and the king knew he had the blessing of Father
Zeus.

The beggar picked up the arrow at his feet, leveled the shaft, and notched it.[90]
With a shout brave Odysseus revealed himself to the suitors. Telemachus sprang
to his side. Odysseus took swift, sure aim and an arrow pierced the throat of
foolhardy Antinous. The rest scattered about the hall, seeking cover. No weapon
or piece of armor was to be found anywhere, and they had to defend themselves
with stools and tables. Haughty Eurymachus offered restitution, believing he

with stools and tables. Haughty Eurymachus offered restitution, believing he
could escape death with honeyed words. His speech fell on deaf ears, and in the
end he drew his sword and leapt toward Odysseus. Another arrow flew from
Odysseus’ bow, and Eurymachus fell dead in a pool of blood.
The avengers too were short on weapons and armor, so Telemachus ran to fetch
them, while Odysseus continued to pick off the suitors one by one with his swift
arrows. Just as the quiver’s load was spent, Telemachus returned with spears,
swords, and shields. They quickly armed themselves, and stood back to back,
father and son, ready for the foe.
But Melanthius suspected where the arms were concealed. He ran to the
storeroom and brought out various pieces of equipment for the remaining suitors.
Odysseus called on Eumaeus and Philoetius to capture the traitor and bind him
strongly. The two faithful servants complied, and then took their places at the
side of Odysseus and his noble son. Athena joined them, disguised as an old
friend. Missiles rained down on the heroes, but the goddess made sure that none
of the suitors hit their mark, while every shot or thrust by the avengers was
successful. For the cowherd there was a satisfying moment when his spear
pierced the breast of the lout who had earlier lobbed a hoof at the king. He
stepped forward and braced himself on the dead man’s body, jerking his weapon
free. Before long, bodies were heaped one upon another and the hall ran with
their blood.

Reunion
Justice had been dealt to the impious suitors. Odysseus ordered Eurycleia to
fetch those of the household maids who had betrayed their master with the
unscrupulous suitors, and they and the herdsmen were given the job of clearing
the hall of bodies and washing away the gore.
Then the disloyal maids were herded to the back of the palace, where
Telemachus strung them up by their necks with a rope. Their dangling feet
jerked briefly, and then they breathed their last. Finally Melanthius paid for his
treachery. His nose and ears were cut off, and after that his genitals. Then he was
dragged beyond the palace walls and his hands and feet were hacked off as well.
It took him some time to die.
Stalwart Odysseus called his old nurse to attend him. Sulfur and fire were
needed for a purification of the hall. When this was done, the king sent for his
faithful queen, who had slept a god-induced sleep throughout. Now all the

faithful queen, who had slept a god-induced sleep throughout. Now all the
household servants came forward to the king, many weeping with joy at the sight
of their long-lost lord. It was almost too much for the weary wanderer to bear.
He had steeled his emotions for so long. He wanted to weep with them, and
rejoice. But there was still the most important task to complete.
Penelope woke to the old nurse Eurycleia hovering over her, shaking her gently
and calling her name.
“What’s the matter, Eurycleia, my dear? Why the fuss?” long-suffering Penelope
groaned as she woke. “Oh, what a dream I had! I saw Odysseus, and he was on
his way home to us, as I’ve dreamt so many times before. It all seemed so real!
He and his men were shipwrecked, and my suffering husband floated on, alone
and half drowned. He came to the island of Calypso, who held him captive for
years. Then he endured the sea alone on a sturdy raft, but mighty Poseidon was
angry with him and caused him trouble. I dreamt that he was rescued by the seagoing Phaeacians, who bore him back to Ithaca’s shores and left him near a
sacred cave with a hoard of fine gifts. How a lonely woman’s mind turns to
fancy! I swear that I could almost hear him planning with Telemachus the
revenge he sought against the unwelcome suitors! Oh, pity me! I think my mind
is turning! The long years of waiting and hoping have taken their toll.”
The old woman was falling over herself in her haste find her mistress a suitable
gown and veil from the strong cypress chest in which she stored her best clothes.
“It’s no dream, my dearest lady! No dream this time!” exclaimed Eurycleia, her
face beaming, the wrinkles around her eyes creased by her grin. “It’s all come to
pass! The king—he’s here, in the palace at last! And he’s calling for you now!
You must make haste, my lady!”

“Penelope woke to the old nurse Eurycleia hovering over her, shaking her
gently and calling her name.”[91]
“But this cannot be,” replied the cautious queen. “Where is the herald to
announce his return? We’ve had no news here in the palace. The only visitor—
apart from those presumptuous suitors, curse them!—was the unfortunate beggar
to whom my son gave hospitality.”
Eurycleia smiled and said, “No, he’s here, all right. And what’s more, he’s rid us
of those cursed suitors, one and all! And the disloyal servants—all delivered to
the fate allotted them by the gods. But now, please, my lady, please! I promised
to bring you down to him straight away.”
“I’m still dreaming, that’s it,” mused Penelope. “All right, nurse dear; I’ll come
along as you insist. I am anxious to converse with my long-lost husband, even in
a dream.”
She had her maids dress her and arrange her hair. Athena ensured that she would
appear lovelier than ever, to dazzle Odysseus with her grace and beauty. She
descended the long staircase with her attendants and took a seat in the hall near
her son and the poor beggar with whom she had spoken before.

The queen sat staring at the stranger, silent, waiting. In his frustration
Telemachus rose and stood between them, and there were harsh words on his
tongue for his mother: “Well, mother, here he is at last! Have you no word of
welcome for your husband and king? Come now, any man has earned a joyful
reception from his loved ones after a long journey! How much more does my
father deserve, after twenty years of suffering and loneliness?”
Penelope spoke nothing but gentle words in response to her son’s admonitions:
“Dearest Telemachus, it’s not that I’m not glad. The shock has left me
speechless. If this were only a dream or a trick of the gods at my expense I
wouldn’t be surprised. I nearly lost all hope of seeing my beloved husband
again, your dear father, after so many years apart.”
Odysseus patiently allowed her to finish speaking and then said to Telemachus:
“Leave us alone, my son. There are things that a couple share only between
themselves, and it is through these things that we shall know each other at last.
Go on, there’s nothing to worry about.” He smiled encouragingly at the young
man, who took the hint and left. Then Odysseus turned back to his circumspect
wife, who eyed him warily from her polished chair.
“Perhaps, dear lady,” he said, “I should bathe and dress appropriately before we
speak again. In the meantime, preparations for a feast should be made ready, and
all the sights and sounds of a celebration should emanate from the palace, the
better to distract the community from discovering the carnage of the day before
we’ve come up with a plan.”
When he returned from his bath it was as though he had been transformed. It was
not just that he had shed his beggar’s rags. Before Penelope stood a man glowing
with strength and virility. He seemed somehow younger and more handsome
than ever, and her heart lurched in her breast as he seated himself once more
across from her.
The smells and sounds of celebration filled the air around them. Yet the queen
eyed him with suspicion, still believing that she dreamt or had simply gone mad.
When she still had nothing to say, the godlike Odysseus shook his head and
sighed wearily: “Well, then, if you have nothing to say, I’ll have a maid make a
bed for me in the hall.”
“Please, you must understand that this is all very hard to believe!” cried
Penelope in distress. “So many years of waiting, longing, hoping for your return!

Penelope in distress. “So many years of waiting, longing, hoping for your return!
I had almost given up, and was steeling myself for the unpleasant task of
choosing a new husband. And now here you are—or so you claim. Come, I’ll
have the women move your old bed out here, so you can sleep at last in some
comfort, and I will retire to my chamber, to ponder all these amazing events.”
“You dare to say such a thing to me?” cried lion-hearted Odysseus. “With my
own two hands I crafted that great four-pillared bed. One of the posts was the
trunk of a living olive tree, around which I built the entire room. If you can move
our marriage bed then you have struck me a stinging blow by cutting that tree.”

Wrapped in the warmth of their loving reunion, Penelope and Odysseus each
told their tale.[92]
In a moment Penelope had flown to her husband. She threw her arms around his
neck, showering kisses on his neck and shoulders as the tears of joy streamed
from her eyes.
“I’m not dreaming … not dreaming,” she sobbed. With shining eyes she met his

“I’m not dreaming … not dreaming,” she sobbed. With shining eyes she met his
gaze, softening now because he understood that he’d been tested. And he was
filled with admiration for this woman who had waited so long, so patiently, out
of duty, respect, and love. His heart melted and he held her in his arms, and
finally he wept, joy and relief filling his soul. They held on tightly to each other
even as they ascended the stairs to their bedchamber.
Eurycleia the wise old nurse had summoned the housekeepers and together they
had strewn the floor of the chamber with sweetsmelling herbs, and laid the bed
with fresh linen as if it were once more the royal couple’s wedding day.
Odysseus and his queen entered the room, and the servants withdrew.
The lovers held each other close through the night, and the wise goddess Athena
instructed golden Dawn to stay her approach, in order to give them more time to
renew their love in each other’s arms.

Chapter Eleven
THE END OF HOPE
Pandora
So the heroes lived and died as playthings of the gods. The greater the hero, the
greater his suffering. Heracles was tormented by fits of madness that led him to
kill his own children; Achilles and countless others died young in wartime
agony; those who survived Troy lost sons and brothers, and returned to find
families torn apart. Generation after generation, the curses afflicting the noble
houses of Mycenae and Thebes created men with monstrous minds, weaving evil
schemes against their own kin. Banishment from home and family, hard travel,
uncertainty, wounds, the frequent prospect of imminent death—these, not just
their human or inhuman opponents, are the obstacles that heroes face and strive
to overcome. Heroes must be better than themselves, and prevail against the
most powerful natural and supernatural forces the gods hurl against them. But
many do not return. In truth, life is a vale of tears.
Why should it be like this? Why are we born, only to suffer and die? All things
are the gods’ doing, and this is no exception. When Prometheus ensured the
survival and continuation of the human race by stealing fire from heaven, he
knew the consequences. He was a Titan, one of the old gods. He knew that his
human wards would be punished and tormented no less savagely than he, but he
still saw this as the preferable course. He knew the obstacles and difficulties that
the gods would place in the way of human life—but he also knew that it was
only in the fire of transcending these obstacles that we humans could purge the
dross from our souls and, perhaps, emerge as heroes ourselves. Our founding
father Prometheus enjoins us not to become bogged down in the soul-sucking
mire of moaning and complaint, but to seek always to enlarge our lives.
Zeus, for his part, did his best to bury and embroil us in so many woes that we
would forget our potential as human beings and live our lives at the level of
dumb beasts, looking only to the gods, not to ourselves, for salvation. And he
found an exceptionally economical way to go about this. He didn’t want to spend
his time constantly inventing new woes for humans—disease one week, famine
the next, and so on. He found just a single instrument that would do it all at once,
and he made it so that, far from trying to avoid their bane, men would actively
seek to embrace it. And when he had dreamt up his device, he laughed out loud,

and the roots of Olympus shook at his mirth.
He ordered great Hephaestus to fashion dumb clay and imbue it with all the
faculties that Prometheus’ men already had, with one difference. This new
human was to be female, not male, patterned on the irresistible beauty of the
Olympian goddesses. Athena taught her the womanly skills and Aphrodite
shrouded her with grace and allure, but, on Zeus’ orders, cunning Hermes gave
her the mind of a lying bitch and the temperament of a thief.
When all the gods had finished their work, the beautiful product stood there
motionless, a lifeless mannequin, until our common father Zeus breathed life
into her. And he named the beautiful bane Pandora, “Allgift,” for all the gods
had made her and all mischief in the lives of men was her gift.

Pandora unleashed all the ills that trouble mankind, to the endless amusement of
the immortal gods.[93]
Prometheus had stolen fire as a way of making up for his brother’s mistake in
failing to assign humans the powers they needed to survive. With Prometheus
out of the way, pinned to the Caucasus mountains, his brother, Epimetheus, had
no one to protect him from himself. Prometheus had warned him not to accept
any gifts from the Olympian gods, for a great gulf of enmity was set between
them and the Titans, but when Zeus sent him fair Pandora, to be his wife,
Epimetheus forgot his brother’s words and gladly took her in.
Up until then, men had lived free of crime and labor and illness, under the reign
of Cronus. But Pandora, the first woman, with the malign curiosity of a thief,

of Cronus. But Pandora, the first woman, with the malign curiosity of a thief,
removed the great lid from the jar of evils and let them out into the world. All
the human emotions—constructive, destructive, and futile—were released,
except for hope alone. Only hope remains in the jar, by the will of Zeus, so that
men live without the promise it brings. And this was the cruelest act, for
Prometheus’ gift of fire had offered us hope.
There can be no better future. Just as every day the eagle ate Prometheus’ liver,
so each new dawn brings fresh toil and pain for mortal men in an endlessly
repeating cycle. The Titan is bound no longer, but we are pinned by Pandora,
now and forever, to the endless, wearisome cycle of procreation and production,
of domesticity and death. Nevertheless, from time to time within this bitter
existence a sweet fire blazes—a life that burns more brightly with a lust for
glory, adventure, or vengeance, and is branded on the collective memory of
humankind. These are the stories the Muse inspires in the hearts and minds of
bards, to ignite our imaginations and allow us to bring our audience relief,
however brief, from a world run by fickle gods. Praise be to the Muses,
daughters of Zeus! Praise to all the gods!

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
The myths were formed early in Greek history—between, say, 1500 and 500
BCE. On the whole, then, and wherever possible, in this book we have stuck to
the earliest extant versions of the stories (starting with Homer in the eighth
century BCE), and have used later authors (such as the Roman poet Ovid, a
brilliant storyteller from the beginning of the first century CE) sparingly and with
caution.
Good, or adequate, translations of the ancient Greek and Roman authors who
preserve or reflect the myths—such as Homer, Hesiod, the Homeric Hymns,
Pindar, the tragedians, pseudo-Apollodorus, Hyginus, and Ovid—are readily
available, especially in the Oxford World’s Classics and Penguin Classics series.
Gaps in these two series may be filled by the Loeb Classical Library, published
by Harvard University Press, though the Loeb translations may be old-fashioned.
Pseudo-Apollodorus’ Library of Greek Mythology is the most thorough source
(though written late, perhaps in the second century CE), and there are three newer
translations: Keith Aldrich, Apollodorus: The Library of Greek Mythology
(Lawrence: Coronado Press, 1975); Michael Simpson, Gods and Heroes of the
Greeks: The Library of Apollodorus (Amherst: University of Massachusetts
Press, 1976); and—containing two of the most important texts—R. Scott Smith
and Stephen Trzaskoma, Apollodorus’ Library and Hyginus’ Fabulae
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 2007). There is also a good anthology, containing
extracts from many literary sources in translation: Stephen Trzaskoma, R. Scott
Smith, and Stephen Brunet (eds.), Anthology of Classical Myth: Primary
Sources in Translation (Indianapolis: Hackett, 2004).
General Reference
Simon Price and Emily Kearns (eds.), The Oxford Dictionary of Classical Myth
and Religion (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003). This consists of lightly
edited essays extracted from the third edition of The Oxford Classical
Dictionary, ed. by Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1996), which is a treasure trove of information on all aspects of
the ancient world.
Greek Religion in General
Louise Bruit Zaidman and Pauline Schmitt Pantel, Religion in the Ancient Greek
City, trans. by Paul Cartledge (2nd edn., Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press, 1997).
Jon Mikalson, Ancient Greek Religion (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005).
The World of the Heroes
Moses Finley, The World of Odysseus (London: Chatto & Windus, 1956).
John V. Luce, Homer and the Heroic Age (London: Thames and Hudson, 1975).
Barry Strauss, The Trojan War: A New History (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2007).
Ancient Sources for the Myths
The standard reference work on the iconography of ancient Mediterranean myth
is the 16-volume Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae, popularly
referred to as LIMC (Zurich: Artemis, 1981). Far more accessible are: Gudrun
Ahlberg-Cornell, Myth and Epos in Early Greek Art: Representation and
Interpretation (Jonsered: Paul Åströms, 1992).
Thomas Carpenter, Art and Myth in Ancient Greece (London: Thames and
Hudson, 1991).
Timothy Gantz, Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993; 2-vol. paperback edn.,
1996).
H. Alan Shapiro, Myth into Art: Poet and Painter in Classical Greece (London:
Routledge, 1994).
Later Artistic Reception of the Myths
Apart from what can be found online, the following books are recommended:
Colin Bailey, The Loves of the Gods: Mythological Painting from Watteau to
David (Fort Worth: Kimbell Art Museum, 1992).
Jane Davidson Reid, The Oxford Guide to Classical Mythology in the Arts,
1300–1990s (2 vols, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
Maria Moog-Grünewald (ed.), The Reception of Myth and Mythology: Classical
Mythology in Literature, Music and Art (Leiden: Brill, 2010).

Discussion
Jan Bremmer (ed.), Interpretations of Greek Mythology (London: Croom Helm,
1987).
Richard Buxton, Imaginary Greece: The Contexts of Mythology (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1994).
Ken Dowden, The Uses of Greek Mythology (London: Routledge, 1992).
Ken Dowden and Niall Livingstone (eds.), A Companion to Greek Mythology
(Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011).
Lowell Edmunds (ed.), Approaches to Greek Myth (Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1990).
Richard Gordon (ed.), Myth, Religion and Society: Structuralist Essays
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981).
Fritz Graf, Greek Mythology: An Introduction (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1993).
Geoffrey Kirk, The Nature of Greek Myths (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974).
Helen Morales, Classical Mythology: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2007).
Martin Nilsson, The Mycenaean Origin of Greek Mythology (2nd edn., Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1972).

Picture References
1. Atlas and Prometheus. Archesilas II Painter. Black-figure cup, Interior. Greek,
560–550 BCE (Photo Scala, Florence)
2. Prometheus. Scott Eaton. Digital sculpture, 2006 CE
(Scott Eaton/www.scott-eaton.com)
3. The Fall of Phaethon. Michelangelo. Pencil drawing, 1533 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/British Museum, London UK)
4. The Mutilation of Uranus by Saturn (Cronus). Giorgio Vasari. Oil painting,
1556 CE
(Photo Scala, Florence)
5. Saturn Devouring One of His Children. Peter Paul Rubens. Oil Painting,
1636–1638 CE
(Scala, Florence/BPK, Bildagentur fuer Kunst, Kultur und Geschichte)
6. The Three Fates. Francesco Salviati. Oil painting, 16th century CE
(Photo Scala, Florence—courtesy of the Ministero Beni e Att. Culturali)
7. The Great Altar of Pergamum. North Frieze Detail. Marble relief sculpture.
Greek, 2nd century CE
(akg-images)
8. Triumph of Neptune (Poseidon). Mosaic floor from Tunis. Roman, 3rd
century CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Giraudon/Musée Archeologique, Sousse, Tunisia.)
9. Athena. Bronze sculpture, detail. Greek, 350–340 bc
(The Art Archive/Archaeological Museum Piraeus/Gianni Dagli Orti)
10. The Punishment of Ixion. Wall painting, from Pompeii. Roman, 1st century
CE
(Photo Scala, Florence/Fotografica Foglia—courtesy of the Ministero Beni e Att.
Culturai)
11. The Return of Persephone. Sir Frederic Leighton. Oil painting, 1891 CE

(The Bridgeman Art Library/Leeds Museums and Galleries (City Art Gallery)
U.K.)
12. The Birth of Venus (Aphrodite). Sandro Botticelli. Tempera painting, 1486
CE
(The Art Archive/Galleria degli Uffizi Florence/Collection Dagli Orti)
13. Pygmalion and Galatea. Jean-Léon Gérome. Oil painting, 1890 CE
(Photo Scala, Florence/Art Resource/Image copyright The Metropolitan
Museum of Art)
14. The Three Graces. Antonio canova. Marble sculpture group, 1812–1816 CE
(The Art Archive/Victoria and Albert Museum London/V&A Images)
15. Venus and Mars (Ares). Sandro Botticelli. Tempera painting, 1485 CE
(The Art Archive/National Gallery London/Eileen Tweedy)
16. The Return of Hephaestus. Polychrome vase, side A. Greek, c. 530 BCE
(akg-images/Erich Lessing)
17. The Flaying of Marsyas. Titian. Oil painting, c. 1576 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Archbishop’s Gallery, Kromeriz/© Mondadori
Electa)
18. Apollo. Pistoxenos Painter or Euphronius. Red-figure cup, interior. Greek,
500–450 BCE
(Photo Scala, Florence)
19. Orpheus. Jean Delville. Oil painting, 1893 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Giraudon/© DACS/Private Collection)
20. The Death of Actaeon. Titian. Oil painting, 1559–75 CE
(The Art Archive/National Gallery London/John Webb)
21. Apollo confronts Hermes and Maia. Black-figure vase. Greek, c. 530 BCE
(The Art Archive/Musée du Louvre/Gianni Dagli Orti)
22. Abduction of Gaymede. Terracotta sculpture group. Greek, c. 470 BCE
(The Art Archive/Olympia Museum Greece/Gianni Dagli Orti)

23. Deucalion and Pyrrha. Peter Paul Rubens. Oil sketch, c. 1636 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Prado, Madrid, Spain/Photo © Boltin Picture
Library)
24. The Cliff of Sisyphus. Alix Marquet. Sculpture. 1930 CE
(Topfoto/Roger-Viollet)
25. Phrixus and the Ram. Red-figure vase. Greek, c. 460 BCE.
(The Art Archive/National Archaeological Museum Athens/Gianni Dagli Orti)
26. The Embarkation of the Argonauts. Lorenzo Costa. Tempera painting ,1480–
1535 CE
(The Art Archive/Civic Museum Padua Italy/Gianni Dagli Orti)
27. Jason and Medea. J. W. Waterhouse. Oil painting, 1907 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Photo © The Maas Gallery, London/Private
Collection)
28. The Calydonian Boar Hunt. Marble relief sculpture. Roman, 3rd century CE
(The Art Archive/Museo Capitolino Rome/Gianni Dagli Orti)
29. Mercury (Hermes) Slays Argus. Engraving, 19th century CE
(Mary Evans Picture Library)
30. Danae. Gustav Klimt. Oil painting, 1907–1908 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Galerie Wurthle, Vienna, Austria)
31. Perseus and the Graeae. Edward Burne-Jones. Gouache painting, 1892 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Southampton City Art Gallery, Hampshire, UK)
32. Medusa. Caravaggio. Oil painting ,1597 CE
(Photo Scala, Florence—courtesy of the Ministero Beni e Att. Culturali)
33. Perseus and Andromeda. Charles-Antoine Coypel. Oil painting, 1726–1727
CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Louvre, Paris, France/Peter Willi)
34. Bellerophon, Pegasus and the Chimera. Boreads Painter. Black-figure cup,
interior. Greek, 570–565 BCE
(Lakonian Black-Figures Kylix, terracotta, attributed to Boreads Painter, 570–

565 bc Sparta, Greece; lakonia, Europe/The J. Paul Getty Museum, Villa
Collection, Malibu, California)
35. The Rape of Europa. Martin de Vos. Oil painting, c. 1590 CE
(The Art Archive/Fine Art Museum Bilbao/Collection Dagli Orti)
36. Dionysus Astride a Panther. Pebble mosaic floor, from Pella. Greek, 400–
360 BCE
(Photo Scala, Florence/Photo Spectrum/Heritage Images)
37. Oedipus and the Sphinx. J-A.D. Ingres. Oil painting, 1808 CE
(The Art Archive/Musée du Louvre Paris/Collection Dagli Orti)
38. Seven Against Thebes. Marble relief sculpture. Etruscan, 6th–5th century
BCE(Photo Scala, Florence)
39. The Banquet of the Gods. Hans Herman and Valentin Curio. Print on paper,
1521 CE
(© The Trustees of the British Museum)
40. Pelops and Hippodamia. Print on paper, 19th century CE
(Mary Evans Picture Library)
41. Orestes and Electra. Stephanus, pupil of Pasiteles. Marble sculpture group.
Roman, 1st century BCE–1st century CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Alinari/Museo Archaeologico Nazionale Naples,
Italy)
42. The Three Duaghters of Cecrops Discovering Erichthonius. Solomon de
Bray. Oil painting, 17th century CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Johnny van Haeften Gallery, London, UK)
43. Theseus and Aethra. Laurent de la Hyre. Oil painting. 1835–1840 CE
(Photo Scala, Florence/The Museum of Fine Arts Budapest)
44. The Deeds of Theseus. Codrus painter. Red-figure cup, interior. Greek, 440–
430 bc
(akg-images/Erich Lessing)
45. The Workshop of Daedelus. Wall painting, from Pompeii. Roman, 1st

century CE
(The Art Archive/Gianni Dagli Orti)
46. The Death of Icarus. Maso da San Friano. Oil painting, 1570–2 CE
(The Art Archive/Palazzo Vecchio Florence/Collection Dagli Orti)
47. Theseus Slays the Minotaur. Dokimasia Painter. Red-figure cup interior.
Greek, c. 470 BCE
(su concessione Ministero per i Beni e le Attività Culturali. © Soprintendenza
per I Beni Archeologici della Toscana)
48. Diana (Artemis) Huntress. Orazio Gentileschi. Oil painting, c. 1635
(Scala, Florence/White Images)
49. Death of Hippolytus. Peter Paul Rubens. Oil painting. 1611-13 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Fitzwilliam Museum, University of Cambridge)
50. The Fight Between the Lapiths and the Centaurs. Pietro di Cosimo. Oil
painting, 1500–1515 CE
(The Art Archive/National Gallery London/Eileen Tweedy)
51. Chariot of the Sun. Red-figure plate. South Italian, 4th century bc
(Corbis/Araldo de Luca)
52. Baby Heracles and the Vipers. Marble sculpture group. Roman, 1st century
CE
(Corbis/Araldo de Luca)
53. Hercules (Heracles) and the Hydra. Antonio del Pollaiolo. Tempera
painting, c. 1470 CE
(The Art Archive/Galleria degli Uffizi Florence/Superstock)
54. Hercules Wrestling with Death for the Body of Alcestic. Sir Frederic
Leighton. Oil painting, 1869–1871 CE
(Photo Scala, Florence/Art Resource NY/Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art)
55. Diomedes Devoured by His Horses. Gustav Moreau. Oil painting, 1865 CE
(The Art Archive/Musée des Beaux Arts Rouen/Gianni Dagli Orti)
56. Heracles in the Cup of Helios. Douris. Red-figure cup, interior. Greek, 500-

450 BCE
(TopFoto/© 2006 Alinari)
57. Nessus, Deianeira, and Hercules. David Vinkeboons. Oil painting, 1612 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, Austria)
58. The Death of Hercules. Bernard Picart. Engraving, 1731 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/The Stapleton Collection/Private Collection)
59. Peleus Wrestling Thetis. Red-figure cup, interior. Greek, c. 430 BCE
(Scala, Florence/BPK, Bildagentur fuer Kunst, Kultur und Geschichte, Berlin)
60. The Judgment of Paris. Marcantonio Raimondi (after Raphael). Engraving ,
1510-20 CE
(Photo Scala, Florence/Art Resource/Museum of Art/Image copyright
Metropolitan Museum of Art)
61. Leda and the Swan. Bartolomeo Ammannati. Marble sculpture, mid-16th
century CE
(Photo Scala, Florence/courtesy of the Ministero Beni e Att. Culturai)
62. Cheiron Instructs Young Achilles. Wall painting, from Herculaneum. Roman,
1st century CE
(The Art Archive/Musée Archéologique Naples/Gianni Dagli Orti)
63. The Sacrifice of Iphigeneia. Wall painting, from Pompeii. Roman, 1st
century CE
(Photo Scala, Florence/Luciano Romano—courtesy of the Ministero Beni e Att.
Culturali)
64. Jupiter (Zeus) and Thetis. J-A.D. Ingres. Oil painting, 1811 CE
(The Art Archive/Musée Granet Aix-en-Provence/Gianni Dagli Orti)
65. The Love of Helen and Paris. Jacques-Louis David. Oil painting, 1789 CE
(The Art Archive/Musée du Louvre Paris/Gianni Dagli Orti)
66. Diomedes Wounding Aphrodite. W.H.A. Fitger. Oil painting, c. 1905 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/© Christie’s Images)
67. Iris. Guy Head. Oil painting, 1793 CE

(The Bridgeman Art Library/Roy Miles Fine Paintings)
68. Hera and Zeus. Stone relief sculpture, Temple “E”, from Selinunte. Greek,
470-460 BC
(The Art Archive/Archaeological Museum Palermo/Gianni Dagli Orti)
69. Achilles tends the Wounded Patroclus. Sosias Painter. Red-figure cup,
interior. Greek, c. 500 BCE
(Photo Scala, Florence/BPK, Bildagentur fuer Kunst, Kultur und Geschichte,
Berlin)
70. Sleep and Death with the Body of Sarpedon. Bronze handle. Etruscan, 400375 BCE
(© The Cleveland Museum of Art. Purchase from the J.H.Wade Fund 1945. 13)
71. Automedon with the Horses of Achilles. Henri Renault. Oil painting, 1868
CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Private Collection)
72. Achilles Drags the Body of Hector. The Antipope Group. Black-figure vase,
side A. Greek, 520-510 BCE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA/William Francis Warden Fund)
73. Priam in the Tent of Achilles. Group of E. Black-figure vase, side A. Greek,
c. 550 BCE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Antikensammlung, Kassel, Germany/©
Museumslandschaft Hessen Kassel)
74. The Suicide of Ajax. Exekias. Black-figure vase, detail side A. Greek, c. 540
BCE
(Mary Evans Picture Library/AISA Media)
75. Ulysses and Neoptolemus Taking Hercules’ Arrows from Philoctetes.
Francois-Xavier Fabré. Oil painting, 1800 CE
(© Musée Fabre de Montpellier Agglomération—photography by Frédéric
Jaulmes)
76. Laocoön and his Sons. Polydorus of Rhodes. Marble sculpture group. Greek,
1st century BCE

(akg-images/Album/Oronoz)
77. Ajax and Cassandra. S.J. Solomon. Oil painting, 1886 CE
(Collection: Art Gallery of Ballarat)
78. Feast of the Nymph Calypso for Odysseus. Jan Breughel the Elder. Oil
painting, 1616 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Penelope Unraveling Her Web, oil painting by
Joseph Wright of Derby/Privart Collection/Photo © Christie’s Images/Private
Collection)
79. Telemachus and Nestor. Red-figure vase, detail. Greek, c.350 BCE
(akg-images/Erich Lessing)
80. Helen Recognizing Telemachus, Odysseus’ Son. Jean-Jacques Lagrenée. Oil
painting, 1795 CE
(Scala, Florence/Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg)
81. Odysseus Meets Nausikaa. Aison. Red-figure box-lid. Greek, c.420 BCE
(Photograph © 2011 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston/Henry Lillie Pierce Fund, 04.
18a-b.)
82. Odysseus Blinds Polyphemus. Polyphemus Painter. Proto-Attic vase, neck
detail. Greek, 675-650 BCE
(The Art Archive/Eleusis Museum Greece/Gianni Dagli Orti)
83. Odysseus Escapes Polyphemus’ Cave. Marble sculpture. Roman, 2nd
century BCE–1st century CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/Alinari/Galleria Doria Pamphilj, Rome, Italy)
84. Circe Transforming the Companions of Ulysses (Odysseus). Jan van der
Straet (Giovanni Stradano). Oil painting, 1570–72 CE
(The Art Archive/Palazzo Vecchio Florence/Collection Dagli Orti)
85. Hades and Persephone. Relief plaque, from Locri Epizephyrii. South Italian,
c. 460 BCE
(The Art Archive/Museo Nazionale Reggio Calabria/Collection Dagli Orti)
86. Ulysses Conjures the Ghost of Teiresias. Edmé Bouchardon. Crayon drawing
on paper, 1762 CE

(The Art Archive/Musée du Louvre Paris/Gianni Dagli Orti)
87. The Siren Vase. Siren Painter. Red-figure vase, side A. Greek, 480–470 bc
(akg-images/Erich Lessing)
88. Odysseus’ Men Butcher the Cattle of the Sun. Pellegrino Tibaldi. Fresco,
from Palazzo Poggi, 1554–56 CE
(Photo Scala, Florence)
89. The Fight Between Ulysses and Irus (Arnaeus). Lovis Corinth. Oil painting,
1903 CE
(akg-images/National Gallery, Prague)
90. Odysseus and the Suitors. Penelope Painter. Red-figure cup, side A. Greek
c. 440 BCE
(Photo Scala, Florence/BPK, Bildagentur für Kunst, Kultur und Geschichte,
Berlin)
91. Penelope Awakened by Eurycleia. Angelica Kauffmann. Oil painting, 1772
CE
(akg-images/Vorarlberger Landesmuseum, Bregenz)
92. Odysseus and Penelope. Francesco Primaticcio. Oil painting, 1563 CE
(Photography, Incorporated, Toledo Museum of Art (Toledo, Ohio), purchased
with funds from the Libbey Endowment, Gift of Edward Drummond Libbey,
1964.60)
93. Pandora’s Box. Bernard picart. Engraving, 1730 CE
(The Bridgeman Art Library/The Stapleton Collection/Private Collection)

